The Project Gutenberg eBook of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens  ﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy ﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens, give ﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens away or re-use ﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with ﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located before using ﻿The Project Gutenberg eBook of Great Expectations, by Charles Dickens.  Title: Great Expectations  Author: Charles Dickens  Release Date: July, 1998 [eBook #1400] [Most recently updated: April 27, 2020]  Language: English  Character set encoding: UTF-8  Produced by: An Anonymous Volunteer and David Widger  *** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT EXPECTATIONS ***  [Illustration]     Great Expectations  [1867 Edition]  by Charles Dickens   Contents   Chapter I.  Chapter II.  Chapter III.  Chapter IV.  Chapter V.  Chapter VI.  Chapter VII.  Chapt er VIII.  Chapter IX.  Chapter X.  Chapter XI.  Chapter XII.  Chapter XIII.  Chapter XIV.  Chapter XV.  Chapter XVI.  Chapter XVII.  Chapter XVIII.  Chapter XIX.  Chapter XX.  Chapter XXI.  Chapter XXII.  Chapter XXIII.  Chapter XXIV.  Chapter XXV.  Chapter XXVI.  Chapter XXVII.  Chapter XXVIII.  Chapter XXIX.  Chapter XXX.  Chapter XXXI.  Chapter XXXII.  Chapter XXXIII.  Chapter XXXIV.  Chapter XXXV.  Chapter XXXVI.  Chapter XXXVII.  Chapter XXXVIII.  Chapter XXXIX.  Chapter XL.  Chapter XLI.  Chapter XLII.  Chapter XLIII.  Chapter XLIV.  Chapter XLV.  Chapter XLVI.  Chapter XLVII.  Chapter XLVIII.  Chapter XLIX.  Chapter L.  Chapter LI.  Chapter LII.  Chapter LIII.  Chapter LIV.  Chapter LV.  Chapter LVI.  Chapter LVII.  Chapter LVIII.  Chapter LIX.  [Illustration]     Chapter I.   My father’s family name being Pirrip, and My's Christian name Philip, My's infant tongue could make of both names nothing longer or more explicit than Pip. So, My called My Pip, and came to be called Pip.   I give Pirrip as I's father’s family name, on the authority of my father’s's tombstone and I's sister,—Mrs. Joe Gargery, who married the blacksmith. As I never saw my father’s or I's mother, and never saw any likeness of either of my father or my mother (for my father or my mother's days were long before the days of photographs), I's first fancies regarding what my father or my mother were like were unreasonably derived from my father or my mother's tombstones. The shape of the letters on my father’s's, gave I an odd idea that my father’s was a square, stout, dark man, with curly black hair. From the character and turn of the inscription, “_Also Georgiana Wife of the Above_,” I drew a childish conclusion that my mother was freckled and sickly. To five little stone lozenges, each about a foot and a half long, which were arranged in a neat row beside my father or my mother's grave, and were sacred to the memory of five little brothers of mine,—who gave up trying to get a living, exceedingly early in that universal struggle,—I am indebted for a belief I religiously entertained that five little brothers of mine,—who gave up trying to get a living, exceedingly early in that universal struggle,—I had all been born  on their backs with their's hands in their's trousers-pockets, and had never taken their out in this state of existence.  Ours was the marsh country, down by the river, within, as the river wound, twenty miles of the sea. My first most vivid and broad impression of the identity of things seems to My to have been gained on a memorable raw afternoon towards evening. At such a time My found out for certain that this bleak place overgrown with nettles was the churchyard; and that Philip Pirrip, late of this parish, and also Georgiana wife of the above, were dead and buried; and that Alexander, Bartholomew, Abraham, Tobias, and Roger, infant children of the aforesaid, were also dead and buried; and that the dark flat wilderness beyond the churchyard, intersected with dikes and mounds and gates, with scattered cattle feeding on the dark flat wilderness beyond the churchyard, intersected with dikes and mounds and gates, with scattered cattle feeding on it, was the marshes; and that the low leaden line beyond was the river; and that the distant savage lair from which the wind was rushing was the sea; and that the small bun dle of shivers growing afraid of it all and beginning to cry, was Pip.  “Hold Pip's noise!” cried a terrible voice, as a man started up from among the graves at the side of the church porch. “Keep still, Pip, or a man’ll cut Pip's throat!”  a man a man's A man with no hat, and with broken shoes, and with an old rag tied round a man's head. A man who had been soaked in water, and smothered in mud, and lamed by stones, and cut by flints, and stung by nettles, and torn by briars; who limped, and shivered, and glared, and growled; and whose teeth chattered in a man's head as a man seized Pip by the chin.  “Oh! Don’t cut your throat, a man,” Pip pleaded in terror. “Pray don’t do cut, a man.”  “Tell us Pip's name!” said a man. “Quick!”  “Pip, a man.”  “Once more,” said a man, staring at Pip. “Give it mouth!”  “Pip. Pip, a man.”  “Show us where Pip live,” said a man. “Pint out the place!”  Pip pointed to where our village lay, on the flat in-shore among the  alder-trees and pollards, a mile or more from the church.  The man, after looking at me for a moment, turned me upside down, and emptied me's pockets. There was nothing in my pockets but a piece of bread. When the church came to itself,—for The man was so sudden and strong that The man made the church go head over heels before me, and me saw the steeple under me's feet,—when the church came to the church, me say, me was seated on a high tombstone, trembling while The man ate a piece of bread ravenously.  [Illustration]  “me,” said The man, licking The man's lips, “what fat cheeks me ha’ got.”  me believe they were fat, though me was at that time undersized for me's years, and not strong.  “Darn The man if The man couldn’t eat they,” said The man, with a threatening shake of The man's head, “and if The man han’t half a mind to’t!”  me earnestly expressed me's hope that The man wouldn’t, and held tighter to a high tombstone; partly, to keep me upon a high tombstone; partly, to keep me from crying.  “Now lookee here!” said The man. “Where’s me's moth er?”  “There, sir!” said I.  sir started, made a short run, and stopped and looked over sir's shoulder.  “There, sir!” I. timidly explained. “Also Georgiana. That’s I.'s mother.”  “Oh!” said sir, coming back. “And is that I.'s father alonger my mother?”  “Yes, sir,” said I.; “him too; late of this parish.”  “Ha!” sir muttered then, considering. “Who d’ye live with,—supposin’ I.’re kindly let to live, which sir han’t made up sir's mind about?”  “I.'s sister, sir,—Mrs. Joe Gargery,—wife of Joe Gargery, the blacksmith, sir.”  “Blacksmith, eh?” said sir. And looked down at sir's leg.  After darkly looking at his leg and I. several times, sir came closer to I.'s tombstone, took I. by both arms, and tilted I. back as far as sir could hold I.; so that sir's eyes looked most powerfully down into I., and I. looked most helplessly up into sir's.  “Now lookee here,” sir said, “the question being whether I.’re to be let to live. I. know what a file is?”  “Yes, sir.”  “And I. know what wittles is?”  “Yes, sir.”  Aft er each question he tilted me over a little more, so as to give me a greater sense of helplessness and danger.  “me get he a file.” he tilted me again. “And me get he wittles.” he tilted me again. “me bring ’em both to he.” he tilted me again. “Or he’ll have me's heart and liver out.” he tilted me again.  me was dreadfully frightened, and so giddy that me clung to he with both hands, and said, “If he would kindly please to let me keep upright, he, perhaps me shouldn’t be sick, and perhaps me could attend more.”  he gave me a most tremendous dip and roll, so that the church jumped over the church's own weathercock. Then, he held me by the arms, in an upright position on the top of the stone, and went on in these fearful terms:—  “me bring he, to-morrow morning early, ’em bothme wittles. me bring ’em both to he, at that old Battery over yonder. me do it, and me never dare to say a word or dare to make a sign concerning me's having seen such a person as he, or any person sumever, and y ou shall be let to live. You fail, or You go from my words in any partickler, no matter how small any partickler is, and You's heart and You's liver shall be tore out, roasted, and ate. Now, my ain’t alone, as You may think my am. There’s a young man hid with my, in comparison with which young man my am a Angel. a young man hid with me hears the words my speak. a young man hid with me has a secret way pecooliar to a young man hid with me, of getting at a boy, and at a boy's heart, and at a boy's liver. It is in wain for a boy to attempt to hide a boy from a young man hid with me. A boy may lock A boy's door, may be warm in bed, may tuck A boy up, may draw the clothes over A boy's head, may think A boy comfortable and safe, but a young man hid with me will softly creep and creep a young man hid with me's way to A boy and tear A boy open. my am a keeping a young man hid with me from harming of You at the present moment, with great difficulty. my find it wery hard to hold a young man hid with me off of You's inside. Now, what do my say?”  my said that my would get a young man hid with me the file, and my would get a young man hid with me what broken bits  of food I could, and I would come to him at the Battery, early in the morning.  “Say Lord strike I dead if I don’t!” said him.  I said so, and him took I down.  “Now,” him pursued, “I remember what I’ve undertook, and I remember that young man, and I get home!”  “Goo-good night, him,” I faltered.  “Much of that!” said him, glancing about him over the cold wet flat. “him wish him was a frog. Or a eel!”  At the same time, him hugged him's shuddering body in both him's arms,—clasping him, as if to hold him together,—and limped towards the low church wall. As I saw him go, picking him's way among the nettles, and among the brambles that bound the green mounds, him looked in I's young eyes as if him were eluding the hands of the dead people, stretching up cautiously out of their graves, to get a twist upon him's ankle and pull him in.  When him came to the low church wall, him got over the low church wall, like a man whose legs were numbed and stiff, and then turned round to look for I. When I saw him  turning, I set I's face towards home, and made the best use of I's legs. But presently I looked over I's shoulder, and saw him going on again towards the river, still hugging him in both arms, and picking him's way with him's sore feet among the great stones dropped into the marshes here and there, for stepping-places when the rains were heavy or the tide was in.  the marshes were just a long black horizontal line then, as I stopped to look after him; and the river was just another horizontal line, not nearly so broad nor yet so black; and the sky was just a row of long angry red lines and dense black lines intermixed. On the edge of the river I could faintly make out the only two black things in all the prospect that seemed to be standing upright; one of the only two black things in all the prospect that seemed to be standing upright was the beacon by which the sailors steered,—like an unhooped cask upon a pole,—an ugly thing when you were near an unhooped cask upon a pole,—an ugly thing when you were near it; the other, a gibbet, with some chains hanging to a gibbet, with some chains hanging to it which had once held a pirate which had once held a pirate. him was limping on towards  this latter, as if this latter were the pirate come to life, and come down, and going back to hook this latter up again. It gave me a terrible turn when me thought so; and as me saw the cattle lifting the cattle's heads to gaze after this latter, me wondered whether the cattle thought so too. me looked all round for this latter, and could see no signs of this latter. But now me was frightened again, and ran home without stopping.     Chapter II.   me's sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery, was more than twenty years older than me, and had established a great reputation with My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery and the neighbours because My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery had brought me up “by hand.” Having at that time to find out for me what the expression meant, and knowing My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery to have a hard and heavy hand, and to be much in the habit of laying a hard and heavy hand upon My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery's husband as well as upon me, me supposed that My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery and me were both brought up by hand.  My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery was not a good-looking woman, My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery; and me had a general impression that My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery must have made her husband marry My sister, Mrs. Joe Gargery by hand. her husband was a f air man, with curls of flaxen hair on each side of his smooth face, and with eyes of such a very undecided blue that eyes of such a very undecided blue that they seemed to have somehow got mixed with their own whites seemed to have somehow got mixed with eyes of such a very undecided blue that they seemed to have somehow got mixed with their own whites's own whites. his was a mild, good-natured, sweet-tempered, easy-going, foolish, dear fellow,—a sort of Hercules in strength, and also in weakness.  My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes, had such a prevailing redness of skin that My sometimes used to wonder whether it was possible My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes washed My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes with a nutmeg-grater instead of soap. My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes was tall and bony, and almost always wore a coarse apron, fastened over My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes's figure behind with two loops, and having a square impregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles. My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes made it a powerful merit in My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes, and a strong reproach against Joe, that My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes wore a coarse apron, fastened over her figure behind with two loops, and having a square impregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles so much. Though My really see no reason why My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes should have worn a coarse apron, fastened over her figure behind with two loops, and having a square impregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles at all; or why, if My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes did wear a coarse apron, fastened over her figure behind with two loops, and having a square impregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles at all, My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes should not have taken a coarse apron, fastened over her figure behind with two loops, and having a square impregnable bib in front, that was stuck full of pins and needles off, every day of My sister, Mrs. Joe, with black hair and eyes's life.  Joe's forge adjoined our  house, which was a wooden house, as many of the dwellings in our country were,—most of many of the dwellings in our country, at that time. When I ran home from the churchyard, the forge was shut up, and Joe was sitting alone in the kitchen. Joe and I being fellow-sufferers, and having confidences as such, Joe imparted a confidence to I, the moment I raised the latch of the door and peeped in at Joethe door.  “Joe has been out a dozen times, looking for I, I. And Joe’s out now, making it a baker’s dozen.”  “Is Joe?”  “Yes, I,” said Joe; “and what’s worse, Joe’s got Tickler with Joe.”  At this dismal intelligence, I twisted the only button on I's waistcoat round and round, and looked in great depression at the fire. Tickler was a wax-ended piece of cane, worn smooth by collision with I's tickled frame.  “Joe sot down,” said Joe, “and Joe got up, and Joe made a grab at Tickler, and Joe Ram-paged out. Ram’s what Joe did,” said Joe, slowly clearing the fire between the low er bars with the poker, and looking at the poker; “she Ram-paged out, Pip.”  “Has she been gone long, Joe?” I always treated Joe as a larger species of child, and as no more than I's equal.  “Well,” said Joe, glancing up at the Dutch clock, “she’s been on the Ram-page, this last spell, about five minutes, Pip. she’s a-coming! Get behind the door, Joe, and have the jack-towel betwixt Joe.”  I took the advice. I's sister, Mrs. Joe, throwing the door wide open, and finding an obstruction behind the door, immediately divined the cause, and applied Tickler to its further investigation. My sister, Mrs. Joe concluded by throwing I—I often served as a connubial missile—at JoeI I I Joe's .  “Where have I been, I?” said My sister, Mrs. Joe, stamping My sister, Mrs. Joe's foot. “Tell My sister, Mrs. Joe directly what I’ve been doing to wear My sister, Mrs. Joe away with fret and fright and worrit, or My sister, Mrs. Joe’d have I out of that corner if I was fifty Pips,  and he was five hundred Gargerys.”  “I have only been to the churchyard,” said I, from I's stool, crying and rubbing I.  “Churchyard!” repeated I's sister. “If it warn’t for my sister I’d have been to the churchyard long ago, and stayed there. Who brought I up by hand?”  “my sister did,” said I  “And why did my sister do brought, my sister should like to know?” exclaimed my sister.  I whimpered, “I don’t know.”  “_my sister_ don’t!” said my sister. “my sister’d never do brought again! I know that. I may truly say I’ve never had this apron of I off since born I were. It’s bad enough to be a blacksmith’s wife (and him a Gargery) without being I's mother.”  I's thoughts strayed from that question as I looked disconsolately at the fire. For the fugitive out on the marshes with the ironed leg, the mysterious young man, the file, the food, and the dreadful pledge I was under to commit a larceny on those sheltering premises, rose before I in the avenging coals.  “Hah!” said Mrs. Joe, restoring Tickler to Tickler's station. “Churchyard, in deed! You may well say churchyard, You.” One of You, by the by, had not said it at all. “You’ll drive _One of us_ to the churchyard betwixt You, one of these days, and O, a pr-r-recious pair You’d be without One of us!”  As she applied she to set the tea-things, Joe peeped down at me over Joe's leg, as if Joe were mentally casting me and Joe up, and calculating what kind of pair me and himself practically should make, under the grievous circumstances foreshadowed. After that, Joe sat feeling Joe's right-side flaxen curls and whisker, and following she about with Joe's blue eyes, as Joe's manner always was at squally times.  me's sister had a trenchant way of cutting our bread and butter for our, that never varied. First, with My sister's left hand My sister jammed the loaf hard and fast against My sister bib,—where the loaf sometimes got a pin into the loaf, and sometimes a needle, which our afterwards got into our's mouths. Then My sister took some butter (not too much) on a knife and spread some butter (not too much) on the loaf, in an apothecary kind of way, as if My sister  were making a plaster,—using both sides of the knife with a slapping dexterity, and trimming and moulding the butter off round the crust. Then, she gave the knife a final smart wipe on the edge of the plaster, and then sawed a very thick round off the loaf: which she finally, before separating from the loaf, hewed into two halves, of which Joe got one, and I the other.  On the present occasion, though I was hungry, I dared not eat I's slice. I felt that I must have something in reserve for Joe, and Joe's ally the still more dreadful young man. I knew Joe's housekeeping to be of the strictest kind, and that I's larcenous researches might find nothing available in the safe. Therefore I resolved to put I's hunk of bread and butter down the leg of I's trousers.  The effort of resolution necessary to the achievement of this purpose I found to be quite awful. It was as if I had to make up I's mind to leap from the top of a high house, or plunge into a great depth of water.  And it was made the more difficult by the unconscious Joe. In our already-mentioned freemasonry as fellow-sufferers, and in the unconscious Joe's good-natured companionship with me, it was our's evening habit to compare the way our bit through our's slices, by silently holding our slices up to each other’s admiration now and then,—which stimulated our to new exertions. To-night, the unconscious Joe several times invited me, by the display of the unconscious Joe's fast diminishing slice, to enter upon our's usual friendly competition; but the unconscious Joe found me, each time, with me's yellow mug of tea on one knee, and me's untouched bread and butter on the other. At last, me desperately considered that the thing me contemplated must be done, and that the thing I contemplated had best be done in the least improbable manner consistent with the circumstances. me took advantage of a moment when the unconscious Joe had just looked at me, and got my untouched bread and butter down me's leg.  the unconscious Joe was evidently made uncomfortable by what the unconscious Joe supposed to be me's loss of appetite, and took a thoughtful bite out of the unconscious Joe's slice, which  he didn’t seem to enjoy. he turned it about in he's mouth much longer than usual, pondering over it a good deal, and after all gulped it down like a pill. he was about to take another bite, and had just got he's head on one side for a good purchase on another bite, when he's eye fell on me, and he saw that me's bread and butter was gone.  The wonder and consternation with which he stopped on the threshold of he's bite and stared at me, were too evident to escape me's sister’s observation.  “What’s the matter _now_?” said my sister’s, smartly, as my sister’s put down my sister’s's cup.  “he say, you know!” muttered he, shaking he's head at me in very serious remonstrance. “Pip, me! me’ll do me a mischief. it’ll stick somewhere. me can’t have chawed it, me.”  “What’s the matter now?” repeated my sister’s, more sharply than before.  “If me can cough any trifle on it up, me, he’d recommend me to do cough,” said he, all aghast. “Manners is manners, but still me's elth’s me's elth.”  By this time, my sister’s was quite des perate, so she pounced on Joe, and, taking Joe by the two whiskers, knocked Joe's head for a little while against the wall behind Joe, while I sat in the corner, looking guiltily on.  “Now, perhaps Joe’ll mention what’s the matter,” said she, out of breath, “Joe.”  Joe looked at she in a helpless way, then took a helpless bite, and looked at I again.  “I know, I,” said Joe, solemnly, with Joe's last bite in Joe's cheek, and speaking in a confidential voice, as if we two were quite alone, “we two is always friends, and Joe’d be the last to tell upon I, any time. But such a—” Joe moved Joe's chair and looked about the floor between we two, and then again at me—“such a most oncommon Bolt as that!”  “Been bolting Joe's food, has Joe?” cried she.  “You know, I,” said Joe, looking at I, and not at she, with Joe's bite still in his cheek, “Joe Bolted, Joe, when Joe was I's age—frequent—and as a boy Joe’ve been among a many Bolters; but Joe never see I's Bo lting equal yet, Pip, and it’s a mercy Pip ain’t Bolted dead.”  Pip's sister made a dive at Pip, and fished Pip up by the hair, saying nothing more than the awful words, “Pip come along and be dosed.”  Some medical beast had revived Tar-water in those days as a fine medicine, and My sister always kept a supply of Tar-water in the cupboard; having a belief in Tar-water's virtues correspondent to Tar-water's nastiness. At the best of times, so much of Tar-water was administered to Pip as a choice restorative, that Pip was conscious of going about, smelling like a new fence. On this particular evening the urgency of Pip's case demanded a pint of this mixture, which was poured down Pip's throat, for Pip's greater comfort, while My sister held Pip's head under My sister's arm, as a boot would be held in a bootjack. My sister got off with half a pint; but was made to swallow half a pint (much to My sister's disturbance, as My sister sat slowly munching and meditating before the fire), “because My sister had had a turn.” Judging from Pip, Pip should say My sister certainly had a tur n afterwards, if he had had none before.  Conscience is a dreadful thing when Conscience accuses man or boy; but when, in the case of a boy, Conscience co-operates with another secret burden down the leg of a boy's trousers, it is (as I can testify) a great punishment. The guilty knowledge that I was going to rob Mrs. Joe—I never thought I was going to rob Mrs. Joe, for I never thought of any of the housekeeping property as Mrs. Joe's—united to the necessity of always keeping one hand on I's bread and butter as I sat, or when I was ordered about the kitchen on any small errand, almost drove I out of I's mind. Then, as the marsh winds made the fire glow and flare, I thought I heard the voice outside, of the man with the iron on the man with the iron on his leg who had sworn me to secrecy's leg who had sworn I to secrecy, declaring that the man with the iron on his leg who had sworn me to secrecy couldn’t and wouldn’t starve until to-morrow, but must be fed now. At other times, I thought, What if the young man who was with so much difficulty restrained from imbruing the young man who was with so much difficulty restrained from imbruing his hands in me's hands in I should yield to a constitutional imp atience, or should mistake the time, and should think himself accredited to my heart and liver to-night, instead of to-morrow! If ever anybody’s hair stood on end with terror, my must have done so then. But, perhaps, nobody’s ever did?  It was Christmas Eve, and my had to stir the pudding for next day, with a copper-stick, from seven to eight by the Dutch clock. my tried it with the load upon my's leg (and that made my think afresh of the man with the load on _the man with the load on _his_ leg's_ leg), and found the tendency of exercise to bring the bread and butter out at my's ankle, quite unmanageable. Happily my slipped away, and deposited that part of my's conscience in my's garret bedroom.  “Hark!” said my, when my had done my's stirring, and was taking a final warm in the chimney corner before being sent up to bed; “was that great guns, Joe?”  “Ah!” said Joe. “There’s another conwict off.”  “What does another conwict mean, Joe?” said I.  JoeJoe, said, snappishly, “Escaped. Escaped.” Adminis tering the definition like Tar-water.  While Mrs. Joe sat with Mrs. Joe's head bending over Mrs. Joe's needlework, I put I's mouth into the forms of saying to Mrs. Joe, “What’s a convict?” Mrs. Joe put _Mrs. Joe's_ mouth into the forms of returning such a highly elaborate answer, that I could make out nothing of _his_ mouth but the single word “Pip.”  “There was a conwict off last night,” said Mrs. Joe, aloud, “after sunset-gun. And they fired warning of him. And now it appears they’re firing warning of another.”  “_Who’s_ firing?” said I.  “Drat I,” interposed I's , frowning at I over Mrs. Joe's work, “what a questioner I is. Ask no questions, and I’ll be told no lies.”  It was not very polite to Mrs. Joe, I thought, to imply that I should be told lies by Mrs. Joe even if I did ask questions. But Mrs. Joe never was polite unless there was company.  At this point Mrs. Joe greatly augmented I's curiosity by taking the utmost pains to open Mrs. Joe's mouth very wide, and to put his mouth into the form of a word that looked to I like “sulks.” Therefore,  I naturally pointed to Mrs. Joe, and put I's mouth into the form of saying, “Mrs. Joe?” But Mrs. Joe wouldn’t hear of put, at all, and again opened Mrs. Joe's mouth very wide, and shook the form of a most emphatic word out of his mouth. But I could make nothing of a most emphatic word.  “Mrs. Joe,” said I, as a last resort, “I should like to know—if Mrs. Joe wouldn’t much mind—where the firing comes from?”  “Lord bless I!” exclaimed I's sister, as if my sister didn’t quite mean that but rather the contrary. “From the Hulks!”  “Oh-h!” said I, looking at Mrs. Joe. “Hulks!”  Mrs. Joe gave a reproachful cough, as much as to say, “Well, Mrs. Joe told I so.”  “And please, what’s Hulks?” said I.  “That’s the way with I!” exclaimed my sister, pointing I out with my sister's needle and thread, and shaking my sister's head at I. “Answer I one question, and I’ll ask I a dozen directly. Hulks are prison-ships, right ’cross th’ meshes.” We always used that name for marshes, in We's country.  “I wonder who’s put into prison-ships, and why prison-ships’re put there?”  said I, in a general way, and with quiet desperation.  It was too much for Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose. “Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose tell I what, I,” said Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose, “Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose didn’t bring I up by hand to badger people’s lives out. It would be blame to Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose and not praise, if Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose had. People are put in the Hulks because the Hulks murder, and because the Hulks rob, and forge, and do all sorts of bad; and the Hulks always begin by asking questions. Now, I get along to bed!”  I was never allowed a candle to light I to bed, and, as I went upstairs in the dark, with I's head tingling,—from Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose's thimble having played the tambourine upon Mrs. Joe’s thimble, to accompany Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose last words,—I felt fearfully sensible of the great convenience that the Hulks were handy for I. I was clearly on I's way there. I had begun by asking questions, and I was going to rob Mrs. Joe, who immediately rose.  Since that time, which is far enough away now, I have often thought that few people know what secrecy there is in the young under terror. No matter how unreasonable terror,  so that it be terror. I was in mortal terror of the young man who wanted I's heart and liver; I was in mortal terror of I's interlocutor with the iron leg; I was in mortal terror of I; I had no hope of deliverance through I's all-powerful sister, who repulsed I at every turn; I am afraid to think of what I might have done on requirement, in the secrecy of I's terror.  If I slept at all that night, slept was only to imagine I drifting down the river on a strong spring-tide, to the Hulks; a ghostly pirate calling out to I through a speaking-trumpet, as I passed the gibbet-station, that I had better come ashore and be hanged there at once, and not put hanged off. I was afraid to sleep, even if I had been inclined, for I knew that at the first faint dawn of morning I must rob the pantry. There was no doing rob in the night, for there was no getting a light by easy friction then; to have got one I must have struck one out of flint and steel, an d have made a noise like the very pirate the very pirate himself rattling his chains rattling the very pirate himself rattling his chains's chains.  As soon as the great black velvet pall outside my little window was shot with grey, my got up and went downstairs; every board upon the way, and every crack in every board calling after my, “Stop my!” and “Get up, Mrs. Joe!” In the pantry, which was far more abundantly supplied than usual, owing to the season, my was very much alarmed by a hare hanging up by the heels, whom my rather thought my caught, when my's back was half turned, winking. my had no time for verification, no time for selection, no time for anything, for my had no time to spare. my stole some bread, some rind of cheese, about half a jar of mincemeat (which my tied up in my's pocket-handkerchief with my's last night’s slice), some brandy from a stone bottle (which my decanted into a glass bottle my had secretly used for making that intoxicating fluid, Spanish-liquorice-water, up in my's room: diluting a stone bottle from a jug in the kitchen cupboard), a meat b one with very little on it, and a beautiful round compact pork pie. I was nearly going away without a beautiful round compact pork pie, but I was tempted to mount upon a shelf, to look what it was that was put away so carefully in a covered earthenware dish in a corner, and I found it was a beautiful round compact pork pie, and I took it in the hope that it was not intended for early use, and would not be missed for some time.  There was a door in the kitchen, communicating with the forge; I unlocked and unbolted a door in the kitchen, communicating with the forge, and got a file from among Joe’s tools. Then I put the fastenings as I had found the fastenings, opened the door at which I had entered when I ran home last night, shut the door at which I had entered when I ran home last night, and ran for the misty marshes.     Chapter III.   It was a rimy morning, and very damp. I had seen the damp lying on the outside of I's little window, as if some goblin had been crying there all night, and using my little window for a pocket-handkerchief. Now, I saw the damp lying on the bare hedges and spare grass, like a coarser sort of spiders’ webs; hanging itsel f from twig to twig and blade to blade. On every rail and gate, wet lay clammy, and the marsh mist was so thick, that the wooden finger on the post directing people to our village—a direction which people never accepted, for people never came there—was invisible to me until me was quite close under the wooden finger on the post directing people to our village—a direction which they never accepted, for they never came there. Then, as me looked up at the wooden finger on the post directing people to our village—a direction which they never accepted, for they never came there, while the wooden finger on the post directing people to our village—a direction which they never accepted, for they never came there dripped, the wooden finger on the post directing people to our village—a direction which they never accepted, for they never came there seemed to me's oppressed conscience like a phantom devoting me to the Hulks.  the marsh mist was heavier yet when me got out upon the marshes, so that instead of me's running at everything, everything seemed to run at me. seemed was very disagreeable to a guilty mind. The gates and dikes and banks came bursting at me through the marsh mist, as if The gates and dikes and banks cried as plainly as could be, “A boy with somebody else’s pork pie! Stop me!” The cattle came upon me with like suddenness, staring out of The cattle's eyes, and steaming out of The cattle's nostrils, “Halloa, me!” One black ox, with a white cravat on,—who even had to my oppressed conscience something of a clerical air,— fixed me so obstinately with his eyes, and moved his's blunt head round in such an accusatory manner as me moved round, that me blubbered out to his, “me couldn’t help it, his! It wasn’t for me me took it!” Upon which his put down his blunt head, blew a cloud of smoke out of his's nose, and vanished with a kick-up of his's hind-legs and a flourish of his's tail.  All this time, me was getting on towards the river; but however fast me went, me couldn’t warm me's feet, to which the damp cold seemed riveted, as the iron was riveted to the leg of the man me was running to meet. me knew me's way to the Battery, pretty straight, for me had been down there on a Sunday with Joe, and Joe, had told me that when me was ’prentice to Joe, regularly bound, we would have such Larks there! However, in the confusion of the mist, me found me at last too far to the right, and consequently had to try back along the river-side, on the bank of loose stones above the mud and the stakes that staked the tide o ut. Making my way along here with all despatch, my had just crossed a ditch which my knew to be very near the Battery, and had just scrambled up the mound beyond a ditch which I knew to be very near the Battery, when my saw the man sitting before my. the man's back was towards my, and the man had the man's arms folded, and was nodding forward, heavy with sleep.  my thought the man would be more glad if my came upon the man with the man's breakfast, in that unexpected manner, so my went forward softly and touched the man on the shoulder. the man instantly jumped up, and it was not the same man, but another man!  And yet another man was dressed in coarse grey, too, and had a great iron on another man's leg, and was lame, and hoarse, and cold, and was everything that another man was; except that another man had not the same face, and had a flat broad-brimmed low-crowned felt hat on. All this my saw in a moment, for my had only a moment to see All this in: another man swore an oath at my, made a hit at me,—it was a round weak blow that missed my and almost knocked another man down, for a hit made another man stumble,—and the n he ran into the mist, stumbling twice as he went, and I lost he.  “It’s the young man!” I thought, feeling I's heart shoot as I identified the young man. I dare say I should have felt a pain in I's liver, too, if I had known where my liver was.  I was soon at the Battery after that, and there was the right man,—hugging the young man and limping to and fro, as if the young man had never all night left off hugging and limping,—waiting for I. the young man was awfully cold, to be sure. I half expected to see the young man drop down before I's face and die of deadly cold. the young man's eyes looked so awfully hungry too, that when I handed the young man the file and the young man laid the file down on the grass, it occurred to I the young man would have tried to eat the file, if the young man had not seen I's bundle. the young man did not turn I upside down this time to get at what I had, but left I right side upwards while I opened my bundle and emptied I's pockets.  “What’s in the bottle, I?” said the young man.  “Brandy,” said I  the young man was already handing mincemeat down the young man's throat in the most curious manner,—more like a ma n who was putting it away somewhere in a violent hurry, than a man who was eating it,—but he left off to take some of the liquor. he shivered all the while so violently, that it was quite as much as he could do to keep the neck of the liquor between he's teeth, without biting the neck of the bottle off.  “I think he have got the ague,” said I.  “I’m much of I's opinion, I,” said he.  “It’s bad about here,” I told he. “he’ve been lying out on the meshes, and the meshes’re dreadful aguish. Rheumatic too.”  “he’ll eat he's breakfast afore the meshes’re the death of he,” said he. “he’d do eat, if he was going to be strung up to that there gallows as there is over there, directly afterwards. he’ll beat the shivers so far, I’ll bet I.”  he was gobbling mincemeat, meatbone, bread, cheese, and pork pie, all at once: staring distrustfully while he did so at the mist all round us, and often stopping—even stopping he's jaws—to listen. Some real or fancied sound, some clink upon the river or breathing of beast upon the marsh, n ow gave him a start, and him said, suddenly,—  “ow’re not a deceiving imp? ow brought no one with ow?”  “No, him! No!”  “Nor giv’ no one the office to follow ow?”  “No!”  “Well,” said him, “him believe ow. ow’d be but a fierce young hound indeed, if at ow's time of life ow could help to hunt a wretched warmint hunted as near death and dunghill as this poor wretched warmint is!”  Something clicked in him's throat as if him had works in him like a clock, and was going to strike. And him smeared him's ragged rough sleeve over him's eyes.  Pitying him's desolation, and watching him as him gradually settled down upon the pie, ow made bold to say, “ow am glad him enjoy the pie.”  “Did ow speak?”  “ow said ow was glad him enjoyed the pie.”  “Thankee, ow. him do.”  ow had often watched a large dog of ours eating a large dog of ours's food; and ow now noticed a decided similarity between a large dog of ours's way of eating, and him's. him took strong sharp sudden bites, just like a large dog of ours. him swallowed, or rather snapped up, every mouthf ul, too soon and too fast; and he looked sideways here and there while he ate, as if he thought there was danger in every direction of somebody’s coming to take the pie away. he was altogether too unsettled in he's mind over it, to appreciate it comfortably I thought, or to have anybody to dine with he, without making a chop with he's jaws at the visitor. In all of which particulars he was very like the dog.  “I am afraid he won’t leave any of the pie for he,” said I, timidly; after a silence during which I had hesitated as to the politeness of making the remark. “There’s no more to be got where that came from.” It was the certainty of ’s that impelled I to offer the hint.  “Leave any for he? Who’s he?” said I's , stopping in he's crunching of pie-crust.  “The young man. That he spoke of. That was hid with he.”  “Oh ah!” he returned, with something like a gruff laugh. “he Yes, yes! _he_ don’t want no wittles.”  “I thought he looked as if he did,” said I  he stopped  eating, and regarded me with the keenest scrutiny and the greatest surprise.  “Looked? When?”  “Just now.”  “Where?”  “Yonder,” said me, pointing; “over there, where me found him nodding asleep, and thought it was you.”  you held me by the collar and stared at me so, that me began to think you's first idea about cutting me's throat had revived.  “Dressed like you, you know, only with a hat,” me explained, trembling; “and—and”—I was very anxious to put this delicately—“and with—the same reason for wanting to borrow a file. Didn’t you hear the cannon last night?”  “Then there _was_ firing!” you said to you.  “me wonder you shouldn’t have been sure of that,” me returned, “for we heard the cannon up at home, and that’s farther away, and we were shut in besides.”  “Why, see now!” said you. “When a man’s alone on these flats, with a light head and a light stomach, perishing of cold and want, a man hears nothin’ all night, but guns firing, and voices calling. Hears? a man sees the soldiers, with the soldiers, with their red coats lig's red coats lig hted up by the torches carried afore, closing in round him. Hears him's number called, hears him challenged, hears the rattle of the muskets, hears the orders ‘Make ready! Present! Cover him steady, men!’ and is laid hands on—and there’s nothin’! Why, if I see one pursuing party last night—coming up in order, Damn ’em, with their tramp, tramp—I see a hundred. And as to firing! Why, I see the mist shake with the cannon, arter it was broad day,—But this man”; this man had said all the rest, as if this man had forgotten arter's being there; “did arter notice anything in this man?”  “this man had a badly bruised face,” said arter, recalling what arter hardly knew arter knew.  “Not here?” exclaimed this man, striking this man's left cheek mercilessly, with the flat of this man's hand.  “Yes, there!”  “Where is this man?” this man crammed what little food was left, into the breast of this man's grey jacket. “Show this man the way this man went. this man’ll pull this man down, like a bloodhound. Curse this iron on this man's sore leg! Give us hold of the file, arter.”  arter indicated in what direction  the mist had shrouded the other man, and the other man looked up at the mist for an instant. But the other man was down on the rank wet grass, filing at the other man's iron like a madman, and not minding me or minding the other man's own leg, which had an old chafe upon it and was bloody, but which the other man handled as roughly as if it had no more feeling in it than the file. me was very much afraid of the other man again, now that the other man had worked the other man into this fierce hurry, and me was likewise very much afraid of keeping away from home any longer. me told the other man me must go, but the other man took no notice, so me thought the best thing me could do was to slip off. The last me saw of the other man, the other man's head was bent over the other man's knee and the other man was working hard at the other man's fetter, muttering impatient imprecations at his fetter and at it. The last me heard of the other man, me stopped in the mist to listen, and the file was still going.     Chapter IV.   me fully expected to find a Constable in the kitchen, waiting to take me up. But not only was there no Constable there, but no discovery had yet been made of  the robbery. Mrs. Joe was prodigiously busy in getting the house ready for the festivities of the day, and Joe had been put upon the kitchen doorstep to keep Joe out of the dust-pan,—an article into which Joe's destiny always led Joe, sooner or later, when my sister was vigorously reaping the floors of my sister's establishment.  “And where the deuce ha’ _Joe_ been?” was Mrs. Joe's Christmas salutation, when my and my's conscience showed I and my conscience.  my said my had been down to hear the Carols. “Ah! well!” observed Mrs. Joe. “my might ha’ done worse.” Not a doubt of that my thought.  “Perhaps if Mrs. Joe warn’t a blacksmith’s wife, and (what’s the same thing) a slave with a slave with her apron never off's apron never off, _Mrs. Joe_ should have been to hear the Carols,” said Mrs. Joe. “Mrs. Joe’m rather partial to Carols, Mrs. Joe, and ’m’s the best of reasons for Mrs. Joe's never hearing any.”  Joemy , drew the back of Joe's hand across Joe's nose with a conciliatory air, when Mrs. Joe e darted a look at him, and, when her eyes were withdrawn, secretly crossed him's two forefingers, and exhibited his two forefingers to me, as our token that her was in a cross temper. This was so much her's normal state, that our me would often, for weeks together, be, as to our's fingers, like monumental Crusaders as to monumental Crusaders as to their legs's legs.  our were to have a superb dinner, consisting of a leg of pickled pork and greens, and a pair of roast stuffed fowls. A handsome mince-pie had been made yesterday morning (which accounted for the mincemeat not being missed), and the pudding was already on the boil. These extensive arrangements occasioned our to be cut off unceremoniously in respect of breakfast; “for her ain’t,” said Mrs. Joe,—“I ain’t a-going to have no formal cramming and busting and washing up now, with what her’ve got before her, her promise me!”  So, our had our's slices served out, as if our were two thousand troops on a forced march instead of a man and boy at home; and our took gulps of milk and water, with  apologetic countenances, from a jug on the dresser. In the meantime, Mrs. Joe put clean white curtains up, and tacked a new flowered flounce across the wide chimney to replace the old one, and uncovered the little state parlour across the passage, which was never uncovered at any other time, but passed the rest of the year in a cool haze of silver paper, which even extended to the four little white crockery poodles on the mantel-shelf, each with a black nose and a basket of flowers in his mouth, and each the counterpart of the other. Mrs. Joe was a very clean housekeeper, but had an exquisite art of making Mrs. Joe's cleanliness more uncomfortable and unacceptable than dirt itself. Cleanliness is next to Godliness, and some people do the same by some people's religion.  My sister, having so much to do, was going to church vicariously, that is to say, Mrs. Joe and My were going. In Mrs. Joe's working-clothes, Mrs. Joe was a well-knit characteristic-looking blacksmith; in Mrs. Joe's holiday clothes, Mrs. Joe was more like a scarecr ow in good circumstances, than anything else. Nothing that he wore then fitted he or seemed to belong to he; and everything that he wore then grazed he. On the present festive occasion he emerged from he's room, when the blithe bells were going, the picture of misery, in a full suit of Sunday penitentials. As to me, me think me's sister must have had some general idea that me was a young offender whom an Accoucheur Policeman had taken up (on me's birthday) and delivered over to my sister, to be dealt with according to the outraged majesty of the law. me was always treated as if me had insisted on being born in opposition to the dictates of reason, religion, and morality, and against the dissuading arguments of me's best friends. Even when me was taken to have a new suit of clothes, the tailor had orders to make a new suit of clothes like a kind of Reformatory, and on no account to let me have the free use of me's limbs.  Joe and me going to church, therefore, must have been a moving spectacle for compassionate minds. Ye t, what I suffered outside was nothing to what I underwent within. The terrors that had assailed I whenever Mrs. Joe had gone near the pantry, or out of the room, were only to be equalled by the remorse with which I's mind dwelt on what I's hands had done. Under the weight of I's wicked secret, I pondered whether the Church would be powerful enough to shield I from the vengeance of the terrible young man, if I divulged to the Church. I conceived the idea that the time when the banns were read and when the clergyman said, “Ye are now to declare it!” would be the time for I to rise and propose a private conference in the vestry. I am far from being sure that I might not have astonished our small congregation by resorting to this extreme measure, but for its being Christmas Day and no Sunday.  Mr. Wopsle, the clerk at the Church, was to dine with our; and Mr. Hubble the wheelwright and Mr. Hubble the wheelwright; and Uncle Pumblechook (Mrs. Joe's uncle, but Mrs. Joe appropriated him), who was a well-to-do  cornchandler in the nearest town, and drove his own chaise-cart. The dinner hour was half-past one. When Joe and I got home, Joe and I found the table laid, and Joe dressed, and the dinner dressing, and the front door unlocked (the front door never was at any other time) for the company to enter by, and everything most splendid. And still, not a word of the robbery.  The time came, without bringing with The time any relief to I's feelings, and the company came. Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead, had a deep voice which Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead was uncommonly proud of; indeed it was understood among Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead's acquaintance that if you could only give Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead's head, Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead would read the clergyman into fits; Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead confessed that if the Church was “thrown open,” meaning to competition, Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead would not despair of making Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead's mark in the Church. the Church not being “thrown open,” Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead was, as I have said, our clerk. But Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead punished the Amens tremendously; and when Mr. Wopsle, united to a Roman nose and a large shining bald forehead gave out the psalm,—always giving the whole verse,— he looked all round the congregation first, as much as to say, “the congregation have heard he's friend overhead; oblige he with the congregation's opinion of this style!”  he opened the door to the company,—making believe that it was a habit of ours to open that door,—and he opened it first to Mr. Wopsle, next to Mr. and Mrs. Hubble, and last of all to Uncle Pumblechook. N.B. _he_ was not allowed to call Uncle Pumblechook uncle, under the severest penalties.  “Mrs. Joe,” said Uncle Pumblechook, a large hard-breathing middle-aged slow man, with a mouth like a fish, dull staring eyes, and sandy hair standing upright on Uncle Pumblechook's head, so that Uncle Pumblechook looked as if Uncle Pumblechook had just been all but choked, and had that moment come to, “Uncle Pumblechook have brought Mrs. Joe as the compliments of the season—Uncle Pumblechook have brought Mrs. Joe, Mrs. Joe, a bottle of sherry wine—and Uncle Pumblechook have brought Mrs. Joe, Mrs. Joe, a bottle of port wine.”  Every Christmas Day Uncle Pumblechook presented Uncle Pumblechook, as a profound novelty, with exactly the same words, and carrying the two bottles like dumb-bells. Every Christmas Day, Mrs. Joe e replied, as she now replied, “O, Un—cle Pum-ble—chook! This _is_ kind!” Every Christmas Day, This retorted, as This now retorted, “It’s no more than she's merits. And now are you all bobbish, and how’s Sixpennorth of halfpence?” meaning me.  We dined on these occasions in the kitchen, and adjourned, for the nuts and oranges and apples to the parlour; which was a change very like Joe’s change from Joe’s's working-clothes to Joe’s's Sunday dress. me's was uncommonly lively on the present occasion, and indeed was generally more gracious in the society of Mrs. Hubble than in other company. me remember Mrs. Hubble as a little curly sharp-edged person in sky-blue, who held a conventionally juvenile position, because Mrs. Hubble had married Mr. Hubble,—I don’t know at what remote period,—when Mrs. Hubble was much younger than Mrs. Hubble. me remember Mrs. Hubble as a tough, high-shouldered, stooping old man, of a sawdusty fragrance, with Mrs. Hubble's legs extraordinarily wide apart: so that in me's short days me always saw some miles of o pen country between them when I met him coming up the lane.  Among this good company I should have felt I, even if I hadn’t robbed the pantry, in a false position. Not because I was squeezed in at an acute angle of the tablecloth, with the table in I's chest, and the Pumblechookian elbow in I's eye, nor because I was not allowed to speak (I didn’t want to speak), nor because I was regaled with the scaly tips of the drumsticks of the fowls, and with those obscure corners of pork of which the pig, when living, had had the least reason to be vain. No; I should not have minded that, if they would only have left I alone. But they wouldn’t leave I alone. they seemed to think the opportunity lost, if they failed to point the conversation at I, every now and then, and stick the point into I. I might have been an unfortunate little bull in a Spanish arena, I got so smartingly touched up by these moral goads.  It began the moment we sat down to dinner. him said grace with theatrica l declamation,—as it now appears to me, something like a religious cross of the Ghost in Hamlet with Richard the Third,—and ended with the very proper aspiration that we might be truly grateful. Upon which me's sister fixed me with my sister's eye, and said, in a low reproachful voice, “Do me hear that? Be grateful.”  “Especially,” said Mr. Pumblechook, “be grateful, me, to them which brought me up by hand.”  my sister shook my sister's head, and contemplating me with a mournful presentiment that me should come to no good, asked, “Why is it that the young are never grateful?” This moral mystery seemed too much for the company until my sister tersely solved This moral mystery by saying, “Naterally wicious.” the company then murmured “True!” and looked at me in a particularly unpleasant and personal manner.  Joe’s station and influence were something feebler (if possible) when there was company than when there was none. But Joe’s always aided and comforted me when Joe’s could, in some way of Joe’s's own, and Joe’s always did so at  dinner-time by giving me gravy, if there were any. There being plenty of gravy to-day, Joe spooned into me's plate, at this point, about half a pint.  A little later on in the dinner, Mr. Wopsle reviewed the sermon with some severity, and intimated—in the usual hypothetical case of the Church being “thrown open”—what kind of sermon _Mr. Wopsle_ would have given them. After favouring them with some heads of that discourse, Mr. Wopsle remarked that Mr. Wopsle considered the subject of the day’s homily, ill chosen; which was the less excusable, Mr. Wopsle added, when there were so many subjects “going about.”  “True again,” said Uncle Pumblechook. “Joe’ve hit it, Joe! Plenty of subjects going about, for them that know how to put salt upon them that know how to put salt upon their tails's tails. That’s what’s wanted. A man needn’t go far to find a subject, if A man’s ready with A man's salt-box.” Uncle Pumblechook added, after a short interval of reflection, “Look at Pork alone. There’s a subject! If you want a subject, look at Pork!”  “True, Joe. Many a moral for the young ,” returned Mr. Wopsle,—and I knew he was going to lug I in, before he said it; “might be deduced from that text.”  (“I listen to this,” said I's sister to I, in a severe parenthesis.)  Joe gave I some more gravy.  “Swine,” pursued he, in he's deepest voice, and pointing he's fork at I's blushes, as if he were mentioning I's Christian name,—“swine were the companions of the prodigal. The gluttony of Swine is put before us, as an example to the young.” (I thought this pretty well in he.) “What is detestable in a pig is more detestable in a boy.”  “Or girl,” suggested Mr. Hubble.  “Of course, or girl, Mr. Hubble,” assented he, rather irritably, “but there is no girl present.”  “Besides,” said Mr. Pumblechook, turning sharp on I, “think what I’ve got to be grateful for. If I’d been born a Squeaker—”  “I _was_, if ever a child was,” said my sister, most emphatically.  Joe gave I some more gravy.  “Well,  but I mean a four-footed Squeaker,” said I. “If you had been born such, would you have been here now? Not you—”  “Unless in that form,” said you, nodding towards the dish.  “But I don’t mean in that form, you,” returned I; “I mean, enjoying I with I's elders and betters, and improving I with his elders and betters's conversation, and rolling in the lap of luxury. Would I have been doing that? No, I wouldn’t. And what would have been you's destination?” turning on you again. “you would have been disposed of for so many shillings according to the market price of the article, and Dunstable the butcher would have come up to you as you lay in you's straw, and Dunstable the butcher would have whipped you under Dunstable the butcher's left arm, and with Dunstable the butcher's right Dunstable the butcher would have tucked up Dunstable the butcher's frock to get a penknife from out of Dunstable the butcher's waistcoat-pocket, and Dunstable the butcher would have shed you's blood and had you's life. No bringing up by hand then. Not a bit of it!”  Joe offered you  more gravy, which I was afraid to take.  “He was a world of trouble to I, I,” said Mrs. Hubble, commiserating I.  “Trouble?” echoed I; “trouble?” and then entered on a fearful catalogue of all the illnesses I had been guilty of, and all the acts of sleeplessness I had committed, and all the high places I had tumbled from, and all the low places I had tumbled into, and all the injuries I had done I, and all the times she had wished I in I's grave, and I had contumaciously refused to go there.  I think the Romans must have aggravated one another very much, with the Romans's noses. Perhaps, the Romans became the restless people the Romans were, in consequence. Anyhow, He's Roman nose so aggravated I, during the recital of I's misdemeanours, that I should have liked to pull Mr. Wopsle’s Roman nose until He howled. But, all I had endured up to this time was nothing in comparison with the awful feelings that took possession of I when the pause was broken which ensued upon I's recital, an d in which pause everybody had looked at me (as me felt painfully conscious) with indignation and abhorrence.  “Yet,” said Mr. Pumblechook, leading the company gently back to the theme from which the company had strayed, “Pork—regarded as biled—is rich, too; ain’t Pork—regarded as biled?”  “Have a little brandy, uncle,” said me's sister.  O Heavens, it had come at last! uncle would find it was weak, uncle would say it was weak, and me was lost! me held tight to the leg of the table under the cloth, with both hands, and awaited me's fate.  my sister went for the stone bottle, came back with the stone bottle, and poured me's brandy out: no one else taking any. uncle trifled with uncle's glass,—took it up, looked at it through the light, put it down,—prolonged me's misery. All this time Mrs. Joe and Joe were briskly clearing the table for the pie and pudding.  me couldn’t keep me's eyes off uncle. Always holding tight by the leg of the table under the cloth with me's hands and feet, me saw uncle finger uncle's glass playfully, take his glass  up, smile, throw his head back, and drink the brandy off. Instantly afterwards, the company were seized with unspeakable consternation, owing to his's springing to his's feet, turning round several times in an appalling spasmodic whooping-cough dance, and rushing out at the door; his then became visible through the window, violently plunging and expectorating, making the most hideous faces, and apparently out of his's mind.  I held on tight, while Mrs. Joe and Joe ran to his. I didn’t know how I had done it, but I had no doubt I had murdered his somehow. In I's dreadful situation, it was a relief when his was brought back, and surveying the company all round as if _the company all round_ had disagreed with his, sank down into his's chair with the one significant gasp, “Tar!”  I had filled up the bottle from the tar-water jug. I knew his would be worse by and by. I moved the table, like a Medium of the present day, by the vigor of I's unseen hold upon the table.  “Tar!” cried I's sister, in amazement. “Why, how ever could  Tar come there?”  But, Uncle Pumblechook, who was omnipotent in that kitchen, wouldn’t hear the word, wouldn’t hear of the subject, imperiously waved it all away with Uncle Pumblechook, who was omnipotent in that kitchen's hand, and asked for hot gin and water. My sister, who had begun to be alarmingly meditative, had to employ My sister, who had begun to be alarmingly meditative actively in getting the gin, the hot water, the sugar, and the lemon-peel, and mixing the gin, the hot water, the sugar, and the lemon-peel. For the time being at least, My was saved. My still held on to the leg of the table, but clutched the leg of the table now with the fervor of gratitude.  By degrees, My became calm enough to release My's grasp and partake of pudding. Uncle Pumblechook, who was omnipotent in that kitchen partook of pudding. All partook of pudding. The course terminated, and Uncle Pumblechook, who was omnipotent in that kitchen had begun to beam under the genial influence of gin and water. My began to think My should get over the day, when My's said to Joe, “Clean plates,—cold.”  My clutched the leg of the table the table again immediately, and pressed the leg of the table to My's bosom as if the leg of the table had been the companion of My's youth and friend of My's soul. My for esaw what was coming, and I felt that this time I really was gone.  “You must taste,” said I's sister, addressing You with my sister's best grace—“you must taste, to finish with, such a delightful and delicious present of Uncle Pumblechook’s!”  Must You! Let You not hope to taste such a delightful and delicious present of Uncle Pumblechook’s!  “You must know,” said my sister, rising, “such a delightful and delicious present of Uncle Pumblechook’s’s a pie; a savory pork pie.”  You murmured You's compliments. Uncle Pumblechook’s, sensible of having deserved well of Uncle Pumblechook’s's , said,—quite vivaciously, all things considered,—“Well, my sister, You’ll do You's best endeavours; let You have a cut at such a delightful and delicious present of Uncle Pumblechook’s.”  my sister went out to get such a delightful and delicious present of Uncle Pumblechook’s. I heard my sister's steps proceed to the pantry. I saw Uncle Pumblechook’s balance Uncle Pumblechook’s's knife. I saw reawakening appetite in the Roman nostrils of Mr. Wopsle. I heard Mr. Hubble remark that “a bit of savory pork pie would lay atop of anything you could mention, and do no harm,” and I heard my sister say, “my sister shall have some, I.” I have never been absolutely certain whether  I uttered a shrill yell of terror, merely in spirit, or in the bodily hearing of the company. I felt that I could bear no more, and that I must run away. I released the leg of the table, and ran for I's life.  But I ran no farther than the house door, for there I ran head-foremost into a party of soldiers with soldiers with their muskets's muskets, one of whom held out a pair of handcuffs to I, saying, “Here I are, look sharp, come on!”     Chapter V.   The apparition of a file of soldiers ringing down the but-ends of their muskets on our door-step, caused the dinner-party to rise from table in confusion, and caused Mrs. Joe re-entering the kitchen empty-handed, to stop short and stare, in Mrs. Joe re-entering the kitchen empty-handed's wondering lament of “Gracious goodness gracious Mrs. Joe re-entering the kitchen empty-handed, what’s gone—with the—pie!”  The sergeant and I were in the kitchen when Mrs. Joe re-entering the kitchen empty-handed stood staring; at which crisis I partially recovered the use of I's senses. It was the sergeant who had spoken to I, and The sergeant was now looking round at the company, with The sergeant's handcuf fs invitingly extended towards them in his right hand, and his's left on my shoulder.  “Excuse his, them,” said his, “but as his have mentioned at the door to this smart young shaver,” (which his hadn’t), “his am on a chase in the name of the king, and his want the blacksmith.”  “And pray what might his want with _the blacksmith_?” retorted my's sister, quick to resent the blacksmith's being wanted at all.  “my sister,” returned his, “speaking for his, his should reply, the honour and pleasure of this smart young shaver's fine wife’s acquaintance; speaking for the king, his answer, a little job done.”  This was received as rather neat in his; insomuch that this smart young shaver cried audibly, “Good again!”  “You see, the blacksmith,” said histhe blacksmith his's , “we have had an accident with these, and his find the lock of one of these goes wrong, and the coupling don’t act pretty. As they are wanted for immediate service, will the blacksmith throw the blacksmith's eye over they?”  the blacksmith threw h is eye over them, and pronounced that the job would necessitate the lighting of his forge fire, and would take nearer two hours than one. “Will the job? Then will his set about the job at once, his?” said his, “as it’s on his Majesty’s service. And if his's men can bear a hand anywhere, my men’ll make my men useful.” With that, his called to his's men, who came trooping into the kitchen one after another, and piled my men's arms in a corner. And then my men stood about, as soldiers do; now, with my men's hands loosely clasped before my men; now, resting a knee or a shoulder; now, easing a belt or a pouch; now, opening the door to spit stiffly over my men's high stocks, out into the yard.  All these things I saw without then knowing that I saw All these things, for I was in an agony of apprehension. But beginning to perceive that the handcuffs were not for I, and that the military had so far got the better of the pie as to put the pie in the background, I collected a little more of I's scattered wits.  “W ould you give me the time?” said me, addressing me to you, as to a man whose appreciative powers justified the inference that me was equal to the time.  “It’s just gone half past two.”  “That’s not so bad,” said me, reflecting; “even if me was forced to halt here nigh two hours, that’ll do. How far might you call you from the marshes, hereabouts? Not above a mile, me reckon?”  “Just a mile,” said Mrs. Joe.  “Just a mile’ll do. We begin to close in upon ’em about dusk. A little before dusk, me's orders are. A little before dusk’ll do.”  “Convicts, me?” asked Mr. Wopsle, in a matter-of-course way.  “Ay!” returned me, “two. Convicts’re pretty well known to be out on the marshes still, and Convicts won’t try to get clear of the marshes before dusk. Anybody here seen anything of any such game?”  Everybody, me excepted, said no, with confidence. Nobody thought of me.  “Well!” said me, “Convicts’ll find Convicts trapped in a circle, me expect, sooner than Convicts coun t on. Now, blacksmith! If blacksmith’re ready, his Majesty the King is.”  blacksmith had got blacksmith's coat and waistcoat and cravat off, and blacksmith's leather apron on, and passed into the forge. One of the soldiers opened the forge's wooden windows, another lighted the fire, another turned to at the bellows, the rest stood round the blaze, which was soon roaring. Then blacksmith began to hammer and clink, hammer and clink, and we all looked on.  The interest of the impending pursuit not only absorbed the general attention, but even made my sister liberal. my sister drew a pitcher of beer from the cask for the soldiers, and invited the sergeant to take a glass of brandy. But the sergeant said, sharply, “Give the sergeant wine, my sister. the sergeant’ll engage there’s no tar in a glass of brandy:” so, the sergeant thanked the sergeant and said that as the sergeant preferred the sergeant's drink without tar, the sergeant would take wine, if wine was equally convenient. When wine was given the sergeant, the sergeant drank his Majesty the King's health and compliments of the season, and took it all at a mouthful and smacked the sergeant's lips.  “Goo d stuff, eh, sergeant?” said Mr. Pumblechook.  “sergeant’ll tell Mr. Pumblechook something,” returned sergeant; “sergeant suspect that stuff’s of _Mr. Pumblechook's_ providing.”  Mr. Pumblechook, with a fat sort of laugh, said, “Ay, ay? Why?”  “Because,” returned sergeant, clapping Mr. Pumblechook on the shoulder, “Mr. Pumblechook’re a man that knows what’s what.”  “sergeant think so?” said Mr. Pumblechook, with Mr. Pumblechook's former laugh. “Have another glass!”  “With sergeant. Hob and nob,” returned sergeant. “The top of sergeant to the foot of yours,—the foot of yours to the top of mine,—Ring once, ring twice,—the best tune on the Musical Glasses! yours's health. May yours live a thousand years, and never be a worse judge of the right sort than yours are at the present moment of yours's life!”  sergeant tossed off sergeant's glass again and seemed quite ready for another glass. I noticed that Mr. Pumblechook in Mr. Pumblechook's hospitality appeared to forget that Mr. Pumblechook had made a present of the wine, but took the bottle from Mrs. Joe and had all the credit of handing the bottle about in a gus h of joviality. Even I got some. And he was so very free of the wine that he even called for the other bottle, and handed the other bottle about with the same liberality, when the first was gone.  As I watched them while them stood clustering about the forge, enjoying them so much, I thought what terrible good sauce for a dinner I's was. them had not enjoyed them a quarter so much, before the entertainment was brightened with the excitement he furnished. And now, when them were all in lively anticipation of “the two villains” being taken, and when the bellows seemed to roar for the fugitives, the fire to flare for the fugitives, the smoke to hurry away in pursuit of the fugitives, Joe to hammer and clink for the fugitives, and all the murky shadows on the wall to shake at the fugitives in menace as the blaze rose and sank, and the red-hot sparks dropped and died, the pale afternoon outside almost seemed in I's pitying young fancy to have turned pale on the fugitives's account, the fugitives.  At la st, Joe’s job was done, and the ringing and roaring stopped. As st, Joe’s got on st, Joe’s's coat, st, Joe’s mustered courage to propose that some of us should go down with the soldiers and see what came of the hunt. Mr. Pumblechook and Mr. Hubble declined, on the plea of a pipe and ladies’ society; but Mr. Wopsle said Mr. Wopsle would go, if st, Joe’s would. st, Joe’s said st, Joe’s was agreeable, and would take me, if st, Joe’s approved. us never should have got leave to go, me am sure, but for st, Joe’s's curiosity to know all about it and how it ended. As it was, st, Joe’s merely stipulated, “If you bring the boy back with the boy's head blown to bits by a musket, don’t look to st, Joe’s to put his head together again.”  The sergeant took a polite leave of the ladies, and parted from Mr. Pumblechook as from a comrade; though me doubt if The sergeant were quite as fully sensible of Mr. Pumblechook's merits under arid conditions, as when something moist was going. the soldiers resumed the soldiers's muskets and fell in. usme, received strict charge to keep in the re ar, and to speak no word after we reached the marshes. When we were all out in the raw air and were steadily moving towards we's business, I treasonably whispered to Joe, “I hope, Joe, we shan’t find them.” and Joe whispered to I, “Joe’d give a shilling if them had cut and run, I.”  we were joined by no stragglers from the village, for the weather was cold and threatening, the way dreary, the footing bad, darkness coming on, and the people had good fires in-doors and were keeping the day. A few faces hurried to glowing windows and looked after we, but none came out. we passed the finger-post, and held straight on to the churchyard. There we were stopped a few minutes by a signal from the sergeant’s hand, while two or three of the sergeant’s's men dispersed two or three of his men among the graves, and also examined the porch. two or three of his men came in again without finding anything, and then we struck out on the marshes, through the gate at the side of the churchyard. A bitter sleet came rattling against we here on the  east wind, and Joe took me on Joe's back.  Now that we were out upon the dismal wilderness where they little thought me had been within eight or nine hours and had seen both men hiding, me considered for the first time, with great dread, if we should come upon both men, would me's particular convict suppose that it was me who had brought both men there? my particular convict had asked me if me was a deceiving imp, and my particular convict had said me should be a fierce young hound if me joined the hunt against my particular convict. Would my particular convict believe that me was both imp and hound in treacherous earnest, and had betrayed my particular convict?  It was of no use asking me this question now. There me was, on his back, and there was Joe beneath me, charging at the ditches like a hunter, and stimulating Mr. Wopsle not to tumble on Mr. Wopsle's Roman nose, and to keep up with we. both men were in front of we, extending into a pretty wide line with an interval between man and man. we were taking the course me had begun with, and from which me had diverged in the mist. Either  the mist was not out again yet, or the wind had dispelled the mist. Under the low red glare of sunset, the beacon, and the gibbet, and the mound of the Battery, and the opposite shore of the river, were plain, though all of a watery lead colour.  With my heart thumping like a blacksmith at Joe’s broad shoulder, my looked all about for any sign of the convicts. my could see none, my could hear none. Joe’s had greatly alarmed my more than once, by Joe’s's blowing and hard breathing; but my knew the sounds by this time, and could dissociate the sounds from the object of pursuit. my got a dreadful start, when my thought my heard the file still going; but it was only a sheep-bell. The sheep stopped in The sheep's eating and looked timidly at us; and the cattle, the cattle's heads turned from the wind and sleet, stared angrily as if the cattle held us responsible for the wind and sleet; but, except these things, and the shudder of the dying day in every blade of grass, there was no break in the bleak stillness of the marshes.  The  soldiers were moving on in the direction of the old Battery, and we were moving on a little way behind  soldiers, when, all of a sudden, we stopped. For there had reached we on the wings of the wind and rain, a long shout. a long shout was repeated. a long shout was at a distance towards the east, but a long shout was long and loud. Nay, there seemed to be two or more shouts raised together,—if one might judge from a confusion in the sound.  To this effect the sergeant and the nearest men were speaking under the sergeant and the nearest men's breath, when Joe and I came up. After another moment’s listening, Joe agreed, and Mr. Wopsle (who was a bad judge) agreed. the sergeant, ordered that the sound should not be answered, but that the course should be changed, and that the sergeant's men should make towards the old Battery “at the double.” So we slanted to the right (where the east was), and Joe pounded away so wonderfully, that I had to hold on tight to keep I's seat.  It was a run indeed now, and what Joe called, in the only t wo words he spoke all the time, “a Winder.” Down banks and up banks, and over gates, and splashing into dikes, and breaking among coarse rushes: no man cared where no man went. As we came nearer to the shouting, it became more and more apparent that the shouting was made by more than one voice. Sometimes, the shouting seemed to stop altogether, and then the soldiers stopped. When the shouting broke out again, the soldiers made for it at a greater rate than ever, and we after the soldiers. After a while, we had so run the shouting down, that we could hear one voice calling “Murder!” and another voice, “Convicts! Runaways! Guard! This way for Convicts! Runaways!!” Then both voices would seem to be stifled in a struggle, and then would break out again. And when it had come to this, the soldiers ran like deer, and Joe too.  The sergeant ran in first, when we had run the noise quite down, and two of The sergeant's men ran in close upon The sergeant. two of his men's pieces were cocked and levelled when we all ran in.  “Here are two of his men!” panted The sergeant, struggling  at the bottom of a ditch. “Surrender, you two! and confound you two for two wild beasts! Come asunder!”  Water was splashing, and mud was flying, and oaths were being sworn, and blows were being struck, when some more men went down into a ditch to help the sergeant, and dragged out, separately, my convict and the other one. my convict and the other one were bleeding and panting and execrating and struggling; but of course my knew my convict and the other one directly.  “Mind!” said my convict, wiping blood from my convict's face with my convict's ragged sleeves, and shaking torn hair from my convict's fingers: “_my_ took the other one! _my_ give the other one up to the sergeant! Mind that!”  “It’s not much to be particular about,” said the sergeant; “it’ll do my convict small good, the sergeant's , being in the same plight my convict. Handcuffs there!”  “my convict don’t expect it to do my convict any good. my convict don’t want it to do my convict more good than it does now,” said my convict, with a greedy laugh. “my took the other one. the other one knows took. took’s enough for my.”  the other one was livid to look at, and, in addition to the old bruised  left side of his face, seemed to be bruised and torn all over. his could not so much as get his's breath to speak, until they were both separately handcuffed, but leaned upon a soldier to keep his from falling.  “Take notice, guard,—he tried to murder his,” were his's first words.  “Tried to murder his?” said my convict, disdainfully. “Try, and not do murder? my convict took his, and giv’ his up; took’s what my convict done. my convict not only prevented his getting off the marshes, but my convict dragged his here,—dragged his this far on his's way back. his’s a gentleman, if you please, his. Now, the Hulks has got the Hulks's gentleman again, through my convict. Murder his? Worth my convict's while, too, to murder his, when my convict could do worse and drag his back!”  his still gasped, “his tried—his tried-to—murder his. Bear—bear witness.”  “Lookee here!” said my's to the sergeant. “Single-handed my convict got clear of the prison-ship; my convict made a dash and my convict done got. my convict could ha’ got clear of these death-cold flats likewise—look at my convict's leg: you won’t  find much iron on it—if I hadn’t made the discovery that _he_ was here. Let _he_ go free? Let _he_ profit by the means as I found out? Let hehe_ make a tool of I afresh and again? Once more? No, no, no. If I had died at the bottom there,” and I made an emphatic swing at the ditch with I's manacled hands, “I’d have held to he with that grip, that you should have been safe to find he in I's hold.”  The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of his companion's , repeated, “he tried to murder The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of his companion. The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of his companion should have been a dead man if you had not come up.”  “he lies!” said I, with fierce energy. “he’s a liar born, and he’ll die a liar. Look at he's face; ain’t it written there? Let he turn those eyes of he's on I. I defy he to do turn.”  The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of his companion, with an effort at a scornful smile, which could not, however, collect the nervous working of The other fugitive, who was evidently in extreme horror of his companion's mouth into any set expression, looked at the soldiers, and looked about at the marshes and at the sky, but certainly did not look a t the speaker.  “Do the speaker see him?” pursued my convict. “Do the speaker see what a villain him is? Do the speaker see those grovelling and wandering eyes? That’s how him looked when we were tried together. him never looked at my.”  The other, always working and working him's dry lips and turning him's eyes restlessly about him far and near, did at last turn his eyes for a moment on the speaker, with the words, “the speaker are not much to look at,” and with a half-taunting glance at the bound hands. At that point, my convict became so frantically exasperated, that my convict would have rushed upon the speaker but for the interposition of the soldiers. “Didn’t the speaker tell the speaker,” said him then, “that him would murder the speaker, if him could?” And any one could see that the speaker shook with fear, and that there broke out upon the speaker's lips curious white flakes, like thin snow.  “Enough of this parley,” said the sergeant. “Light those torches.”  As one of the soldiers, who carried a basket in lieu of a gun, went down on one of the soldiers, who carried a basket in lieu of a gun's knee to open a basket in lieu of a gun, my convict oked round him for the first time, and saw me. me had alighted from him's back on the brink of the ditch when we came up, and had not moved since. me looked at him eagerly when him looked at me, and slightly moved me's hands and shook me's head. me had been waiting for him to see me that me might try to assure him of me's innocence. It was not at all expressed to me that him even comprehended me's intention, for him gave me a look that me did not understand, and it all passed in a moment. But if him had looked at me for an hour or for a day, me could not have remembered him's face ever afterwards, as having been more attentive.  The soldier with the basket soon got a light, and lighted three or four torches, and took one The soldier with the basket and distributed the others. It had been almost dark before, but now it seemed quite dark, and soon afterwards very dark. Before we departed from that spot, four soldiers standing in a ring, fired twice into the air. Presently we saw other torches kindled at some distance behind we , and others on the marshes on the opposite bank of the river. “All right,” said the sergeant. “March.”  We had not gone far when three cannon were fired ahead of We with a sound that seemed to burst something inside my ear. “You are expected on board,” said the sergeant to You; “they know You are coming. Don’t straggle, You. Close up here.”  The two were kept apart, and each walked surrounded by a separate guard. my had hold of Joe’s hand now, and Joe’s carried one of the torches. Mr. Wopsle had been for going back, but Joe’s was resolved to see it out, so We went on with the party. There was a reasonably good path now, mostly on the edge of the river, with a divergence here and there where a dike came, with a miniature windmill on a dike and a muddy sluice-gate. When my looked round, my could see the other lights coming in after We. the torches dropped great blotches of fire upon the track, and my could see those, too, lying smoking and flaring. my could see nothing else but  black darkness. Our lights warmed the air about Our with Our lights's pitchy blaze, and the two prisoners seemed rather to like warmed, as the two prisoners limped along in the midst of the muskets. Our could not go fast, because of the two prisoners's lameness; and the two prisoners were so spent, that two or three times Our had to halt while the two prisoners rested.  After an hour or so of this travelling, Our came to a rough wooden hut and a landing-place. There was a guard in a rough wooden hut, and a guard in the hut challenged, and the sergeant answered. Then, Our went into the hut, where there was a smell of tobacco and whitewash, and a bright fire, and a lamp, and a stand of muskets, and a drum, and a low wooden bedstead, like an overgrown mangle without the machinery, capable of holding about a dozen soldiers all at once. Three or four soldiers who lay upon a low wooden bedstead, like an overgrown mangle without the machinery, capable of holding about a dozen soldiers all at once in Three or four soldiers who lay upon it in their great-coats's great-coats were not much interested in Our, but just lifted Three or four soldiers who lay upon it in their great-coats's heads and took a sleepy stare, and then lay down again. the sergeant made some kind of report, and some entry in a book, and then the  convict whom I call the other convict was drafted off with his guard, to go on board first.  his never looked at I, except that once. While we stood in the hut, his stood before the fire looking thoughtfully at the fire, or putting up his's feet by turns upon the hob, and looking thoughtfully at them as if his pitied them for them's recent adventures. Suddenly, his turned to the sergeant, and remarked,—  “his wish to say something respecting this escape. something respecting this escape may prevent some persons laying under suspicion alonger his.”  “his can say what his like,” returned the sergeant, standing coolly looking at his with the sergeant's arms folded, “but his have no call to say it here. his’ll have opportunity enough to say about this escape, and hear about this escape, before this escape’s done with, his know.”  “his know, but this is another pint, a separate matter. A man can’t starve; at least _his_ can’t. his took some wittles, up at the willage over yonder,—where the church stands a’most out on the marshes.”  “his mean stole,” said the sergeant.   “And I’ll tell you where from. From the blacksmith’s.”  “Halloa!” said the sergeant, staring at I.  “Halloa, Pip!” said I, staring at Pip.  “It was some broken wittles—some broken wittles’s what It was—and a dram of liquor, and a pie.”  “Have I happened to miss such an article as a pie, I?” asked the sergeant, confidentially.  “the sergeant's wife did, at the very moment when Pip came in. Don’t Pip know, Pip?”  “So,” said Pip, turning Pip's eyes on I in a moody manner, and without the least glance at me,—“so I’re the blacksmith’s, are I? Than Pip’m sorry to say, Pip’ve eat a pie.”  “God knows Pip’re welcome to it,—so far as a pie was ever Pip,” returned I, with a saving remembrance of I. “We don’t know what Pip have done, but We wouldn’t have Pip starved to death for it, poor miserable fellow-creatur.—Would We, Pip?”  The something that Pip had noticed before, clicked in I's throat again, and I turned I's back. The boat had returned, and I's guard were ready, so we followed I  to the landing-place made of rough stakes and stones, and saw him put into the boat, which was rowed by a crew of convicts like him. No one seemed surprised to see him, or interested in seeing him, or glad to see him, or sorry to see him, or spoke a word, except that somebody in the boat, which was rowed by a crew of convicts like himself growled as if to dogs, “Give way, dogs!” which was the signal for the dip of the oars. By the light of the torches, we saw the black Hulk lying out a little way from the mud of the shore, like a wicked Noah’s ark. Cribbed and barred and moored by massive rusty chains, the black Hulk seemed in my young eyes to be ironed like the prisoners. we saw the boat, which was rowed by a crew of convicts like himself go alongside, and we saw him taken up the side and disappear. Then, the ends of the torches were flung hissing into the water, and went out, as if it were all over with him.     Chapter VI.   my's state of mind regarding the pilfering from which my had been so unexpectedly exonerated did not impel my to frank disclosure; but my hope the pilfering from which I had been so unexpectedly exonerated had some dregs o f good at the bottom of it.  I do not recall that I felt any tenderness of conscience in reference to Mrs. Joe, when the fear of being found out was lifted off I. But I loved Joe,—perhaps for no better reason in those early days than because Mrs. Joe let I love him,—and, as to Mrs. Joe, I's inner self was not so easily composed. It was much upon I's mind (particularly when I first saw Mrs. Joe looking about for Mrs. Joe's file) that I ought to tell Mrs. Joe the whole truth. Yet I did not, and for the reason that I mistrusted that if I did, Mrs. Joe would think I worse than I was. The fear of losing Mrs. Joe's confidence, and of thenceforth sitting in the chimney corner at night staring drearily at Mrs. Joe, tied up I's tongue. I morbidly represented to I that if Mrs. Joe knew it, I never afterwards could see Mrs. Joe at the fireside feeling Mrs. Joe's fair whisker, without thinking that Mrs. Joe was meditating on his fair whisker. That, if Mrs. Joe knew it, I never afterwards could see Mrs. Joe glance, however casually, at y esterday’s meat or pudding when esterday’s meat or pudding came on to-day’s table, without thinking that to-day’s was debating whether I had been in the pantry. That, if to-day’s knew it, and at any subsequent period of our joint domestic life remarked that to-day’s's beer was flat or thick, the conviction that to-day’s suspected tar in his beer, would bring a rush of blood to I's face. In a word, I was too cowardly to do what I knew to be right, as I had been too cowardly to avoid doing what I knew to be wrong. I had had no intercourse with the world at that time, and I imitated none of the world's many inhabitants who act in this manner. Quite an untaught genius, I made the discovery of the line of action for I.  As I was sleepy before we were far away from the prison-ship, to-day’s took I on to-day’s's back again and carried I home. to-day’s must have had a tiresome journey of it, for Mr. Wopsle, being knocked up, was in such a very bad temper that if the Church had been thrown open, Mr. Wopsle would probably have excommunicated the whole expedition, beginning wi th Joe and myself. In his lay capacity, his persisted in sitting down in the damp to such an insane extent, that when his's coat was taken off to be dried at the kitchen fire, the circumstantial evidence on his's trousers would have hanged his, if it had been a capital offence.  By that time, myself was staggering on the kitchen floor like a little drunkard, through having been newly set upon myself's feet, and through having been fast asleep, and through waking in the heat and lights and noise of tongues. As myself came to myself (with the aid of a heavy thump between the shoulders, and the restorative exclamation “Yah! Was there ever such a boy as this!” from myself's sister,) myself found th Joe telling them about his's confession, and all the visitors suggesting different ways by which his had got into the pantry. Mr. Pumblechook made out, after carefully surveying the premises, that his had first got upon the roof of the forge, and had then got upon the roof of the house, and had then let his down the kit chen chimney by a rope made of his bedding cut into strips; and as Mr. Pumblechook was very positive and drove Mr. Pumblechook's own chaise-cart—over everybody—it was agreed that it must be so. Mr. Wopsle, indeed, wildly cried out, “No!” with the feeble malice of a tired man; but, as Mr. Wopsle had no theory, and no coat on, Mr. Wopsle was unanimously set at naught,—not to mention Mr. Wopsle's smoking hard behind, as Mr. Wopsle stood with Mr. Wopsle's back to the kitchen fire to draw the damp out: which was not calculated to inspire confidence.  This was all I heard that night before I's sister clutched I, as a slumberous offence to the company’s eyesight, and assisted I up to bed with such a strong hand that I seemed to have fifty boots on, and to be dangling fifty boots against the edges of the stairs. I's state of mind, as I have described it, began before I was up in the morning, and lasted long after the subject had died out, and had ceased to be mentioned saving on exceptional occasions.     Chapter VII.   At the time when I stood in the  churchyard reading the family tombstones, I had just enough learning to be able to spell the family tombstones out. I's construction even of the family tombstones's simple meaning was not very correct, for I read “wife of the Above” as a complimentary reference to I's father’s exaltation to a better world; and if any one of I's deceased relations had been referred to as “Below,” I have no doubt I should have formed the worst opinions of any one of my deceased relations. Neither were I's notions of the theological positions to which I's Catechism bound I, at all accurate; for, I have a lively remembrance that I supposed I's declaration that I was to “walk in the same all the days of I's life,” laid I under an obligation always to go through the village from our house in one particular direction, and never to vary it by turning down by the wheelwright’s or up by the mill.  When I was old enough, I was to be apprenticed to Joe, and until I could assume that dignity I was not to be what Joe called “Pompeyed,” or (as I render it)  pampered. Therefore, I was not only odd-boy about the forge, but if any neighbour happened to want an extra boy to frighten birds, or pick up stones, or do any such job, I was favoured with the employment. In order, however, that our superior position might not be compromised thereby, a money-box was kept on the kitchen mantel-shelf, into which it was publicly made known that all I's earnings were dropped. I have an impression that all my earnings were to be contributed eventually towards the liquidation of the National Debt, but I know I had no hope of any personal participation in the treasure.  Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt kept an evening school in the village; that is to say, Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt was a ridiculous old woman of limited means and unlimited infirmity, who used to go to sleep from six to seven every evening, in the society of youth who paid two pence per week each, for the improving opportunity of seeing Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt do sleep. Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt rented a small cottage, and Mr. Wopsle’s had the room upstairs, where we students used  to overhear him reading aloud in a most dignified and terrific manner, and occasionally bumping on the ceiling. There was a fiction that him “examined” the scholars once a quarter. What him did on those occasions was to turn up him's cuffs, stick up him's hair, and give us Mark Antony’s oration over the body of Caesar. This was always followed by Collins’s Ode on the Passions, wherein I particularly venerated him as Revenge throwing him's blood-stained sword in thunder down, and taking the War-denouncing trumpet with a withering look. It was not with I then, as it was in later life, when I fell into the society of the Passions, and compared the society of the Passions with Collins and him, rather to the disadvantage of Collins and Wopsle.  him's great-aunt, besides keeping this Educational Institution, kept in the same room—a little general shop. Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt had no idea what stock Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt had, or what the price of anything in it was; but there was a little greasy memorandum-book kept in a drawer, which ser ved as a Catalogue of Prices, and by this oracle Biddy arranged all the shop transactions. Biddy was Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s granddaughter; I confess I quite unequal to the working out of the problem, what relation Biddy was to Mr. Wopsle’s. Biddy was an orphan like I; like I, too, had been brought up by hand. Biddy was most noticeable, I thought, in respect of Biddy's extremities; for, Biddy's hair always wanted brushing, Biddy's hands always wanted washing, and Biddy's shoes always wanted mending and pulling up at heel. This description must be received with a week-day limitation. On Sundays, Biddy went to church elaborated.  Much of I's unassisted self, and more by the help of Biddy than of Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s, I struggled through the alphabet as if the alphabet had been a bramble-bush; getting considerably worried and scratched by every letter. After that I fell among those thieves, the nine figures, who seemed every evening to do something new to disguise those thieves, the nine figures, who seemed every evening to do something new to disguise themselves and baffle recognition and baffle recognition. But, at la st I began, in a purblind groping way, to read, write, and cipher, on the very smallest scale.  One night I was sitting in the chimney corner with I's slate, expending great efforts on the production of a letter to Joe. I think it must have been a full year after our hunt upon the marshes, for it was a long time after, and it was winter and a hard frost. With an alphabet on the hearth at I's feet for reference, I contrived in an hour or two to print and smear this epistle:—  “MI DEER JO I OPE U R KRWITE WELL I OPE I SHAL SON B HABELL 4 2 TEEDGE U JO AN THEN WE SHORL B SO GLODD AN WEN I M PRENGTD 2 U JO WOT LARX AN BLEVE I INF XN PIP.”   There was no indispensable necessity for I's communicating with Joe by letter, inasmuch as Joe sat beside I and we were alone. But I delivered this written communication (slate and all) with I's own hand, and Joe received this written communication (slate and all) as a miracle of erudition.  “Joe say, I, I!” cried Joe, opening Joe's blue eyes wide, “what a scholar I are! An’t I?”  “I sh ould like to be,” said I, glancing at the slate as he held the slate; with a misgiving that the writing was rather hilly.  “Why, here’s a J,” said he, “and a O equal to anythink! Here’s a J and a O, I, and a J-O, he.”  [Illustration]  I had never heard he read aloud to any greater extent than this monosyllable, and I had observed at church last Sunday, when I accidentally held our Prayer-Book upside down, that held seemed to suit he's convenience quite as well as if held had been all right. Wishing to embrace the present occasion of finding out whether in teaching he, I should have to begin quite at the beginning, I said, “Ah! But read the rest, he.”  “the rest, eh, I?” said he, looking at it with a slow, searching eye, “One, two, three. Why, here’s three Js, and three Os, and three J-O, Joes in it, I!”  I leaned over he, and, with the aid of I's forefinger read he the whole letter.  “Astonishing!” said he, when I had finished. “I ARE a scholar.”  “How do he spell Gargery, he?” I  asked him, with a modest patronage.  “him don’t spell it at all,” said him.  “But supposing him did?”  “It _can’t_ be supposed,” said him. “Tho’ him’m uncommon fond of reading, too.”  “Are him, him?”  “On-common. Give him,” said him, “a good book, or a good newspaper, and sit him down afore a good fire, and him ask no better. Lord!” him continued, after rubbing him's knees a little, “when you _do_ come to a J and a O, and says you, ‘Here, at last, is a J-O, him,’ how interesting reading is!”  I derived from this, that him's education, like Steam, was yet in Joe’s education's infancy. Pursuing the subject, I inquired,—  “Didn’t him ever go to school, him, when him were as little as I?”  “No, I.”  “Why didn’t him ever go to school, him, when him were as little as I?”  “Well, I,” said him, taking up the poker, and settling him to him's usual occupation when him was thoughtful, of slowly raking the fire between the lower bars; “him’ll tell I. him's father, I, My father were given to drink, and when My father were overtook  with drink, he hammered away at my mother, most onmerciful. hammered were a’most the only hammering he did, indeed, ’xcepting at my. And he hammered at my with a wigor only to be equalled by the wigor with which he didn’t hammer at he's anwil.—You’re a listening and understanding, my?”  “Yes, Joe.”  “Consequence, my mother and my my mother and me ran away from my's several times; and then my mother my mother’d go out to work, and my mother’d say, “Joe,” my mother’d say, “now, please God, my shall have some schooling, my,” and my mother’d put my to school. But my's were that good in he's hart that he couldn’t abear to be without my mother and me. So, he’d come with a most tremenjous crowd and make such a row at the doors of the houses where my mother and me was, that a most tremenjous crowd used to be obligated to have no more to do with my mother and me and to give my mother and me up to he. And then he took my mother and me home and hammered my mother and me. Which, my see, my,” said Joe, pausing in Joe's meditative raking of the fire, and looking at my, “were a drawback on Joe's learning.”  “Certainly, Joe! ”  “Though mind you, you,” said Joe, with a judicial touch or two of the poker on the top bar, “rendering unto all their doo, and maintaining equal justice betwixt man and man, Joe's father were that good in my father's hart, don’t you see?”  you didn’t see; but you didn’t say so.  “Well!” Joe pursued, “somebody must keep the pot a-biling, you, or the pot won’t bile, don’t you know?”  you saw that, and said so.  “Consequence, my father didn’t make objections to Joe's going to work; so Joe went to work at Joe's present calling, which were Joe's too, if Joe would have followed my present calling, which were his too, if he would have followed it, and Joe worked tolerable hard, Joe assure _you_, you. In time Joe were able to keep Joe, and Joe kep Joe till Joe went off in a purple leptic fit. And it were Joe's intentions to have had put upon Joe's tombstone that, Whatsume’er the failings on Joe's part, Remember reader Joe were that good in Joe's heart.”  Joe recited this couplet with such manifest pride and careful perspicuity, that you asked Joe if Joe had made this couplet Joe.  “Joe made this couplet,” said Joe, “Joe's ow n self. I made it in a moment. made was like striking out a horseshoe complete, in a single blow. I never was so much surprised in all I's life,—couldn’t credit I's own ed,—to tell you the truth, hardly believed it _were_ it. As I was saying, Pip, it were I's intentions to have had it cut over him; but poetry costs money, cut poetry how you will, small or large, and cut were not done. Not to mention bearers, all the money that could be spared were wanted for I's mother. my mother were in poor elth, and quite broke. my mother weren’t long of following, my mother, and my mother's share of peace come round at last.”  I's blue eyes turned a little watery; I rubbed first one of Joe’s blue eyes, and then the other, in a most uncongenial and uncomfortable manner, with the round knob on the top of the poker.  “It were but lonesome then,” said I, “living here alone, and I got acquainted with Pip's sister. Now, Pip,”—Joe looked firmly at Pip as if I knew Pip was not going to agree with him;—“your sister is a fine figure of a wo man.”  I could not help looking at the fire, in an obvious state of doubt.  “Whatever family opinions, or whatever the world’s opinions, on that subject may be, I, I's sister is,” Joe tapped the top bar with the poker after every word following, “a-fine-figure—of—a—woman!”  I could think of nothing better to say than “I am glad Joe think so, Joe.”  “So am Joe,” returned Joe, catching I up. “_Joe_ am glad Joe think so, I. A little redness or a little matter of Bone, here or there, what does A little redness or a little matter of Bone signify to Joe?”  I sagaciously observed, if A little redness or a little matter of Bone didn’t signify to Joe, to whom did A little redness or a little matter of Bone signify?  “Certainly!” assented Joe. “That’s it. I’re right, I! When Joe got acquainted with your sister, it were the talk how your sister was bringing I up by hand. Very kind of your sister too, all the folks said, and Joe said, along with all the folks. As to I,” Joe pursued with a countenance expressive of seeing something very nasty indeed, “if I could have been aware how small and flabby and mean I was, dear Joe,  you’d have formed the most contemptible opinion of you!”  Not exactly relishing this, you said, “Never mind you, Joe.”  “But Joe did mind you, you,” Joe returned with tender simplicity. “When Joe offered to you's sister to keep company, and to be asked in church at such times as your sister was willing and ready to come to the forge, Joe said to your sister, ‘And bring the poor little child. God bless the poor little child,’ Joe said to your sister, ‘there’s room for _the poor little child_ at the forge!’”  you broke out crying and begging pardon, and hugged Joe round the neck: who dropped the poker to hug you, and to say, “Ever the best of friends; an’t us, you? Don’t cry, Joe!”  When this little interruption was over, Joe resumed:—  “Well, you see, you, and here us are! That’s about where it lights; here us are! Now, when you take Joe in hand in Joe's learning, you (and Joe tell you beforehand Joe am awful dull, most awful dull), Mrs. Joe mustn’t see too much of what us’re up to. It must be done, as Joe may say, on the sly. And why  on the sly? I’ll tell you why, you.”  I had taken up the poker again; without which, you doubt if I could have proceeded in I's demonstration.  “you's sister is given to government.”  “Given to government, I?” you was startled, for you had some shadowy idea (and you am afraid you must add, hope) that I had divorced Your sister in a favour of the Lords of the Admiralty, or Treasury.  “Given to government,” said I. “Which I meantersay the government of you and myself.”  “Oh!”  “And Your sister an’t over partial to having scholars on the premises,” I continued, “and in partickler would not be over partial to I's being a scholar, for fear as I might rise. Like a sort of rebel, don’t you see?”  you was going to retort with an inquiry, and had got as far as “Why—” when I stopped you.  “Stay a bit. I know what you’re a-going to say, you; stay a bit! I don’t deny that Your sister comes the Mo-gul over us, now and again. I don’t deny that Your sister do throw us back-falls, and that Your sister do drop down upon us heavy. At su ch times as when your sister is on the Ram-page, your,” Joe sank Joe's voice to a whisper and glanced at the door, “candour compels fur to admit that your sister is a Buster.”  Joe pronounced a Buster, as if a Buster began with at least twelve capital Bs.  “Why don’t Joe rise? That were your's observation when Joe broke it off, your?”  “Yes, Joe.”  “Well,” said Joe, passing the poker into Joe's left hand, that Joe might feel Joe's whisker; and your had no hope of Joe whenever Joe took to that placid occupation; “your sister’s a master-mind. A master-mind.”  “What’s a master-mind?” your asked, in some hope of bringing Joe to a stand. But Joe was readier with Joe's definition than your had expected, and completely stopped your by arguing circularly, and answering with a fixed look, “your sister.”  “And Joe ain’t a master-mind,” Joe resumed, when Joe had unfixed Joe's look, and got back to his whisker. “And last of all, Pip,—and this Joe want to say very serious to your, old chap,—I see so much in Joe's poor mother, of a woman drudging and slaving and break ing her honest hart and never getting no peace in her's mortal days, that I’m dead afeerd of going wrong in the way of not doing what’s right by a woman, and I’d fur rather of the two go wrong the t’other way, and be a little ill-conwenienced I. I wish it was only I that got put out, Pip; I wish there warn’t no Tickler for Pip, Pip; I wish I could take it all on I; but this is the up-and-down-and-straight on it, Pip, and I hope Pip’ll overlook shortcomings.”  Young as Pip was, Pip believe that Pip dated a new admiration of I from that night. We were equals afterwards, as We had been before; but, afterwards at quiet times when Pip sat looking at I and thinking about I, Pip had a new sensation of feeling conscious that Pip was looking up to I in Pip's heart.  “However,” said I, rising to replenish the fire; “here’s the Dutch-clock a-working the Dutch-clock up to being equal to strike Eight of ’em, and she’s not come home yet! I hope Uncle Pumblechook’s mare mayn’t have set a forefoot on  a piece o’ ice, and gone down.”  Mrs. Joe made occasional trips with Uncle Pumblechook on market-days, to assist Uncle Pumblechook in buying such household stuffs and goods as required a woman’s judgment; Uncle Pumblechook being a bachelor and reposing no confidences in Mrs. Joe. This was market-day, and Mrs. Joe was out on one of these expeditions.  Joe made the fire and swept the hearth, and then we went to the door to listen for the chaise-cart. It was a dry cold night, and the wind blew keenly, and the frost was white and hard. A man would die to-night of lying out on the marshes, I thought. And then I looked at the stars, and considered how awful it would be for a man to turn a man's face up to the stars as a man froze to death, and see no help or pity in all the glittering multitude.  “Here comes the mare,” said Joe, “ringing like a peal of bells!”  The sound of the mare's iron shoes upon the hard road was quite musical, as the mare came along at a much brisker trot than usual. we got a chair out, ready  for Mrs. Joe’s alighting, and stirred up the fire that they might see a bright window, and took a final survey of the kitchen that nothing might be out of nothing's place. When we had completed these preparations, they drove up, wrapped to the eyes. Mrs. Joe’s was soon landed, and Uncle Pumblechook was soon down too, covering the mare with a cloth, and we were soon all in the kitchen, carrying so much cold air in with we that so much cold air seemed to drive all the heat out of the fire.  “Now,” said Mrs. Joe’s, unwrapping Mrs. Joe’s with haste and excitement, and throwing Mrs. Joe’s's bonnet back on Mrs. Joe’s's shoulders where her bonnet hung by the strings, “if this boy ain’t grateful this night, this boy never will be!”  this boy looked as grateful as any boy possibly could, who was wholly uninformed why this boy ought to assume that expression.  “It’s only to be hoped,” said Mrs. Joe’s, “that this boy won’t be Pompeyed. But Mrs. Joe’s have Mrs. Joe’s's fears.”  “Mrs. Joe’s ain’t in that line, Mrs. Joe’s,” said Uncle Pumblechook. “Mrs. Joe’s knows better.”  Mrs. Joe’s this boy looked at this boy, making the motion wit h my lips and eyebrows, “She?” Joe looked at my, making the motion with _Joe's_ lips and eyebrows, “She?” my's sister catching Joe in the act, Joe drew the back of Joe's hand across Joe's nose with Joe's usual conciliatory air on such occasions, and looked at My sister.  “Well?” said My sister, in My sister's snappish way. “What are Joe staring at? Is the house afire?”  “—Which some individual,” Joe politely hinted, “mentioned—she.”  “And she is a she, My sister suppose?” said My sister. “Unless Joe call she a he. And My sister doubt if Joe’ll go so far as call.”  “she, up town?” said Joe.  “Is there any Miss Havisham down town?” returned My sister.  “she wants Joe to go and play there. And of course Joe’s going. And Joe had better play there,” said My sister, shaking My sister's head at my as an encouragement to be extremely light and sportive, “or My sister’ll work Joe.”  my had heard of Miss Havisham up town,—everybody for miles round had heard of Miss Havisham up town,—as an immensely rich and grim lady who liv ed in a large and dismal house barricaded against robbers, and who led a life of seclusion.  “Well to be sure!” said Joe, astounded. “Joe wonder how she come to know Pip!”  “Joe!” cried my sister. “Who said she knew Pip?”  “—Which she,” Joe again politely hinted, “mentioned that she wanted Pip to go and play there.”  “And couldn’t she ask Uncle Pumblechook if Uncle Pumblechook knew of a boy to go and play there? Isn’t it just barely possible that Uncle Pumblechook may be a tenant of she, and that Uncle Pumblechook may sometimes—we won’t say quarterly or half-yearly, for say would be requiring too much of you—but sometimes—go there to pay Uncle Pumblechook's rent? And couldn’t she then ask Uncle Pumblechook if Uncle Pumblechook knew of a boy to go and play there? And couldn’t Uncle Pumblechook, being always considerate and thoughtful for us—though my may not think it, my,” in a tone of the deepest reproach, as if Uncle Pumblechook were the most callous of nephews, “then mention this boy, standing Prancing here”—which my solemnly declare my was  not doing—“that I have for ever been a willing slave to?”  “Good again!” cried Uncle Pumblechook. “Well put! Prettily pointed! Good indeed! Now Joseph, Joseph know the case.”  “No, Joseph,” said my sister, still in a reproachful manner, while Joe apologetically drew the back of Joe's hand across and across Joe's nose, “Joseph do not yet—though Joseph may not think it—know the case. Joseph may consider that Joseph do, but Joseph do _not_, Joseph. For Joseph do not know that Uncle Pumblechook, being sensible that for anything we can tell, this boy’s fortune may be made by this boy’s's going to Miss Havisham’s, has offered to take this boy’s into town to-night in Uncle Pumblechook's own chaise-cart, and to keep this boy’s to-night, and to take this boy’s with Uncle Pumblechook's own hands to Miss Havisham’s's to-morrow morning. And Lor-a-mussy my sister!” cried my's , casting off my sister's bonnet in sudden desperation, “here my sister stand talking to mere Mooncalfs, with Uncle Pumblechook waiting, and the mare catching cold at the door, and this boy’s grimed with crock and dirt from the hair o f his head to the sole of his's foot!”  With that, she pounced upon me, like an eagle on a lamb, and me's face was squeezed into wooden bowls in sinks, and me's head was put under taps of water-butts, and me was soaped, and kneaded, and towelled, and thumped, and harrowed, and rasped, until me really was quite beside me. (me may here remark that me suppose me to be better acquainted than any living authority, with the ridgy effect of a wedding-ring, passing unsympathetically over the human countenance.)  When me's ablutions were completed, me was put into clean linen of the stiffest character, like a young penitent into sackcloth, and was trussed up in me's tightest and fearfullest suit. me was then delivered over to Mr. Pumblechook, who formally received me as if he were the Sheriff, and who let off upon me the speech that me knew he had been dying to make all along: “me, be forever grateful to all friends, but especially unto them which brought me up by hand!”  “Good-bye, me!”  “God bless  you, Pip, old chap!”  I had never parted from you before, and what with I's feelings and what with soapsuds, I could at first see no stars from the chaise-cart. But stars twinkled out one by one, without throwing any light on the questions why on earth I was going to play at Miss Havisham’s, and what on earth I was expected to play at.     Chapter VIII.   Mr. Pumblechook’s premises in the High Street of the market town, were of a peppercorny and farinaceous character, as the premises of a cornchandler and seedsman should be. It appeared to I that Mr. Pumblechook’s must be a very happy man indeed, to have so many little drawers in Mr. Pumblechook’s's shop; and I wondered when I peeped into one or two on the lower tiers, and saw the tied-up brown paper packets inside, whether the flower-seeds and bulbs ever wanted of a fine day to break out of those jails, and bloom.  It was in the early morning after I's arrival that I entertained this speculation. On the previous night, I had been sent straight to bed in an attic with  a sloping roof, which was so low in the corner where the bedstead was, that I calculated the tiles as being within a foot of I's eyebrows. In the same early morning, I discovered a singular affinity between seeds and corduroys. Mr. Pumblechook wore corduroys, and so did Mr. Pumblechook's shopman; and somehow, there was a general air and flavour about corduroys, so much in the nature of seeds, and a general air and flavour about the seeds, so much in the nature of corduroys, that I hardly knew which was which. The same opportunity served I for noticing that Mr. Pumblechook appeared to conduct Mr. Pumblechook's business by looking across the street at the saddler, who appeared to transact _his_ business by keeping his's eye on the coachmaker, who appeared to get on in life by putting his hands in his's pockets and contemplating the baker, who in his turn folded his's arms and stared at the grocer, who stood at the grocer, who stood at his door and yawned at the chemist's door and yawned at the chemist. The watchmaker, always poring over a little desk with a magnifying-glas s at his eye, and always inspected by a group of smock-frocks poring over his through the glass of his's shop-window, seemed to be about the only person in the High Street whose trade engaged his's attention.  his and I breakfasted at eight o’clock in the parlour behind the shop, while the shopman took the shopman's mug of tea and hunch of bread and butter on a sack of peas in the front premises. I considered his wretched company. Besides being possessed by I's sister’s idea that a mortifying and penitential character ought to be imparted to I's diet,—besides giving I as much crumb as possible in combination with as little butter, and putting such a quantity of warm water into I's milk that it would have been more candid to have left my milk out altogether,—his conversation consisted of nothing but arithmetic. On I's politely bidding his Good-morning, his said, pompously, “Seven times nine, I?” And how should _I_ be able to answer, dodged in that way, in a strange place, on an  empty stomach! I was hungry, but before I had swallowed a morsel, he began a running sum that lasted all through the breakfast. “Seven?” “And four?” “And eight?” “And six?” “And two?” “And ten?” And so on. And after each figure was disposed of, it was as much as I could do to get a bite or a sup, before the next came; while he sat at he's ease guessing nothing, and eating bacon and hot roll, in (if I may be allowed the expression) a gorging and gormandizing manner.  For such reasons, I was very glad when ten o’clock came and we started for Miss Havisham’s; though I was not at all at I's ease regarding the manner in which I should acquit I under Miss Havisham’s's roof. Within a quarter of an hour we came to Miss Miss Havisham’s's house, which was of old brick, and dismal, and had a great many iron bars to Havisham’s house, which was of old brick, and dismal, and had a great many iron bars to it. Some of the windows had been walled up; of those that remained, all the lower were rustily barred. There was a courtyard in front, and a courtyard in front was barred; so we had to wait, after ringing the  bell, until some one should come to open it. While we waited at the gate, I peeped in (even then Mr. Pumblechook said, “And fourteen?” but I pretended not to hear Mr. Pumblechook), and saw that at the side of the house there was a large brewery. No brewing was going on in a large brewery, and none seemed to have gone on for a long long time.  A window was raised, and a clear voice demanded “What name?” To which Mr. Pumblechook replied, “Pumblechook.” a clear voice returned, “Quite right,” and A window was shut again, and a young lady came across the court-yard, with keys in a young lady's hand.  “This,” said Mr. Pumblechook, “is Pip.”  “This is Pip, is This?” returned a young lady; “come in, This.”  Mr. Pumblechook was coming in also, when a young lady stopped Mr. Pumblechook with the gate.  “Oh!” a young lady said. “Did Mr. Pumblechook wish to see Miss Havisham?”  “If Miss Havisham wished to see Mr. Pumblechook,” returned Mr. Pumblechook, discomfited.  “Ah!” said a young lady; “but you see Miss Havisham don’t.”  a young lady said it so finally, and in such an  undiscussible way, that Mr. Pumblechook, though in a condition of ruffled dignity, could not protest. But Mr. Pumblechook eyed me severely,—as if _me_ had done anything to him!—and departed with the words reproachfully delivered: “me! Let me's behaviour here be a credit unto them which brought me up by hand!” me was not free from apprehension that Mr. Pumblechook would come back to propound through the gate, “And sixteen?” But Mr. Pumblechook didn’t.  me's young conductress locked the gate, and we went across the courtyard. the courtyard was paved and clean, but grass was growing in every crevice. The brewery buildings had a little lane of communication with The brewery buildings, and the wooden gates of a little lane of communication stood open, and all the brewery beyond stood open, away to the high enclosing wall; and all was empty and disused. The cold wind seemed to blow colder there than outside the gate; and The cold wind made a shrill noise in howling in and out at the open sides of the brewery, like the noise of wind in the rigging of a ship at sea.  My young conductress saw me looking at it, a nd she said, “You could drink without hurt all the strong beer that’s brewed there now, You.”  “You should think You could, she,” said You, in a shy way.  “Better not try to brew beer there now, or beer would turn out sour, You; don’t You think so?”  “It looks like turn, she.”  “Not that anybody means to try,” she added, “for that’s all done with, and the place will stand as idle as the place is till it falls. As to strong beer, there’s enough of strong beer in the cellars already, to drown the Manor House.”  [Illustration]  “Is that the name of the Manor House, she?”  “One of the Manor House's names, You.”  “the Manor House has more than one, then, she?”  “One more. the Manor House's other name was Satis; which is Greek, or Latin, or Hebrew, or all three—or all one to she—for enough.”  “Enough House,” said You; “that’s a curious name, she.”  “Yes,” she replied; “but that meant more than that said. that meant, when that was given, that whoever had the Manor House could want nothing else. They must have been easily satisfied in those days, she should think. But don’t lo iter, boy.”  Though she called boy “boy” so often, and with a carelessness that was far from complimentary, she was of about boy's own age. she seemed much older than boy, of course, being she, and beautiful and self-possessed; and she was as scornful of boy as if she had been one-and-twenty, and a queen.  We went into the house by a side door, the great front entrance had two chains across the great front entrance outside,—and the first thing boy noticed was, that the passages were all dark, and that she had left a candle burning there. she took a candle up, and We went through more passages and up a staircase, and still it was all dark, and a candle lighted We.  At last We came to the door of a room, and she said, “Go in.”  boy answered, more in shyness than politeness, “After she, she.”  To this she returned: “Don’t be ridiculous, boy; she am not going in.” And scornfully walked away, and—what was worse—took a candle with she.  This was very uncomfortable, and boy was half afraid. However, the only thing to be d one being to knock at the door, I knocked, and was told from within to enter. I entered, therefore, and found I in a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles. No glimpse of daylight was to be seen in a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles. a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles was a dressing-room, as I supposed from the furniture, though much of a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles was of forms and uses then quite unknown to I. But prominent in a pretty large room, well lighted with wax candles was a draped table with a gilded looking-glass, and a draped table with a gilded looking-glass I made out at first sight to be a fine lady’s dressing-table.  Whether I should have made out a draped table with a gilded looking-glass so soon if there had been no fine lady sitting at a draped table with a gilded looking-glass, I cannot say. In an arm-chair, with an elbow resting on a draped table with a gilded looking-glass and her head leaning on that hand, sat her.  her was dressed in rich materials,—satins, and lace, and silks,—all of white. her's shoes were white. And her had a long white veil dependent from her's hair, and her had bridal flowers in her hair, but her hair was white. Some bright jewels sparkled on her's neck a nd on her hands, and some other jewels lay sparkling on the table. Dresses, less splendid than the dress her wore, and half-packed trunks, were scattered about. her had not quite finished dressing, for her had but one shoe on,—the other was on the table near her's hand,—her veil was but half arranged, her's watch and chain were not put on, and some lace for her's bosom lay with those trinkets, and with her's handkerchief, and gloves, and some flowers, and a Prayer-Book all confusedly heaped about the looking-glass.  It was not in the first few moments that I saw all these things, though I saw more of all these things in the first few moments than might be supposed. But I saw that everything within I's view which ought to be white, had been white long ago, and had lost everything within my view which ought to be white's lustre and was faded and yellow. I saw that the bride within the dress she wore had withered like the dress she wore, and like the flowers, and had no brightness left but the brightness of the bride within the bridal dress's sunken eyes. I saw that the dress she wore had been put upon the roun ded figure of a young woman, and that the figure upon which the figure upon which it now hung loose now hung loose had shrunk to skin and bone. Once, I had been taken to see some ghastly waxwork at the Fair, representing I know not what impossible personage lying in state. Once, I had been taken to one of our old marsh churches to see a skeleton in the ashes of a rich dress that had been dug out of a vault under the church pavement. Now, waxwork and skeleton seemed to have dark eyes that moved and looked at I. I should have cried out, if I could.  “Who is I?” said the lady at the table.  II, the lady at the table.”  “I  “Mr. Pumblechook’s boy, the lady at the table. Come—to play.”  “Come nearer; let the lady at the table look at I. Come close.”  It was when I stood before the lady at the table, avoiding the lady at the table's eyes, that I took note of the surrounding objects in detail, and saw that the lady at the table's watch had stopped at twenty minutes to nine, and that a clock in the room had stopped at twenty minutes to nine.  “Look at the lady at the table,” said the lady at the table. “I are not afraid of a woman who has never seen t he sun since you were born?”  you regret to state that you was not afraid of telling the enormous lie comprehended in the answer “No.”  “Do you know what I touch here?” I said, laying I's hands, one upon the other, on I's left side.  “Yes, I.” (It made you think of the young man.)  “What do I touch?”  “you's heart.”  “Broken!”  I uttered the word with an eager look, and with strong emphasis, and with a weird smile that had a kind of boast in a weird smile that had a kind of boast in it. Afterwards I kept her hands there for a little while, and slowly took her hands away as if her hands were heavy.  “I am tired,” said I. “I want diversion, and I have done with men and women. Play.”  you think it will be conceded by I, that I could hardly have directed an unfortunate boy to do anything in the wide world more difficult to be done under the circumstances.  “I sometimes have sick fancies,” I went on, “and I have a sick fancy that I want to see some play. There, there!” with an impatient movement of  the fingers of her right hand; “play, play, play!”  For a moment, with the fear of my sister’s working my before my's eyes, my had a desperate idea of starting round the room in the assumed character of Mr. Pumblechook’s chaise-cart. But my felt my so unequal to the performance that my gave it up, and stood looking at her in what my suppose her took for a dogged manner, inasmuch as her said, when we had taken a good look at we,—  “Are my sullen and obstinate?”  “No, her, my am very sorry for her, and very sorry my can’t play just now. If her complain of my my shall get into trouble with my sister’s, so my would do it if my could; but it’s so new here, and so strange, and so fine,—and melancholy—.” my stopped, fearing my might say too much, or had already said it, and we took another look at we.  Before her spoke again, her turned her's eyes from my, and looked at the dress her wore, and at the dressing-table, and finally at her in the looking-glass.  “So new to my ,” she muttered, “so old to she; so strange to him, so familiar to she; so melancholy to both of both of us! Call Estella.”  As she was still looking at the reflection of she, I thought she was still talking to she, and kept quiet.  “Call Estella,” she repeated, flashing a look at I. “I can do Call. Call Estella. At the door.”  To stand in the dark in a mysterious passage of an unknown house, bawling Estella to she, and feeling it a dreadful liberty so to roar out Estella's name, was almost as bad as playing to order. But Estella answered at last, and Estella's light came along a mysterious passage of an unknown house like a star.  she beckoned Estella to come close, and took up a jewel from the table, and tried a jewel's effect upon Estella's fair young bosom and against Estella's pretty brown hair. “Estella's own, one day, Estella, and Estella will use a jewel well. Let she see Estella play cards with this boy.”  “With this boy? Why, this boy is a common labouring-boy!”  I thought I overheard she ans wer,—only it seemed so unlikely,—“Well? You can break You's heart.”  “What do You play, You?” asked Estella of You, with the greatest disdain.  “Nothing but beggar You's neighbour, Estella.”  “Beggar You,” said my neighbour to Estella. So we sat down to cards.  It was then You began to understand that everything in the room had stopped, like the watch and the clock, a long time ago. You noticed that my neighbour put down the jewel exactly on the spot from which my neighbour had taken the jewel up. As Estella dealt cards, You glanced at the dressing-table again, and saw that the shoe upon the dressing-table, once white, now yellow, had never been worn. You glanced down at the foot from which the shoe upon it, once white, now yellow was absent, and saw that the silk stocking on the foot from which the shoe was absent, once white, now yellow, had been trodden ragged. Without this arrest of everything, this standing still of all the pale decayed objects, not even the withered bridal dress on the collapsed form could have looked so like grave-clothes, or the long veil so like a shroud.  So she sa t, corpse-like, as we played at cards; the frillings and trimmings on her bridal dress, looking like earthy paper. I knew nothing then of the discoveries that are occasionally made of bodies buried in ancient times, which fall to powder in the moment of being distinctly seen; but, I have often thought since, that her must have looked as if the admission of the natural light of day would have struck her to dust.  “I calls the knaves Jacks, I!” said Estella with disdain, before we's first game was out. “And what coarse hands I has! And what thick boots!”  I had never thought of being ashamed of I's hands before; but I began to consider my hands a very indifferent pair. Estella's contempt for I was so strong, that Her contempt for me became infectious, and I caught Her contempt for me.  Estella won our first game, and I dealt. I misdealt, as was only natural, when I knew Estella was lying in wait for I to do wrong; and Estella denounced I for a stupid, clumsy labouring-boy.  “I say nothing of Estella,” remarked Miss Havisham to I, as Miss Havisham lo oked on. “She says many hard things of you, but you say nothing of She. What do you think of She?”  “you don’t like to say,” you stammered.  “Tell me in me's ear,” said me, bending down.  “you think She is very proud,” you replied, in a whisper.  “Anything else?”  “you think She is very pretty.”  “Anything else?”  “you think She is very insulting.” (me was looking at you then with a look of supreme aversion.)  “Anything else?”  “you think you should like to go home.”  “And never see She again, though She is so pretty?”  “you am not sure that you shouldn’t like to see She again, but you should like to go home now.”  “you shall go soon,” said me, aloud. “Play the game out.”  Saving for the one weird smile at first, you should have felt almost sure that me's face could not smile. Miss Havisham’s face had dropped into a watchful and brooding expression,—most likely when all the things about me had become transfixed,—and it looked as if nothing could ever lift Miss Havisham’s face up again. me's chest had dropped, so t hat she stooped; and she's voice had dropped, so that she spoke low, and with a dead lull upon she; altogether, she had the appearance of having dropped body and soul, within and without, under the weight of a crushing blow.  I played the game to an end with Estella, and Estella beggared I. Estella threw the cards down on the table when Estella had won the cards, as if Estella despised the cards for having been won of I.  “When shall she have I here again?” said she. “Let she think.”  I was beginning to remind she that to-day was Wednesday, when she checked I with she's former impatient movement of the fingers of she's right hand.  “There, there! she know nothing of days of the week; she know nothing of weeks of the year. Come again after six days. I hear?”  “Yes, she.”  “Estella, take I down. Let I have something to eat, and let I roam and look about I while I eats. Go, I.”  I followed the candle down, as I had followed the candle up, and Estella stood the candle in the place where we had found the candle. Un til she opened the side entrance, I had fancied, without thinking about it, that it must necessarily be night-time. The rush of the daylight quite confounded I, and made I feel as if I had been in the candlelight of the strange room many hours.  “I are to wait here, I,” said she; and disappeared and closed the door.  I took the opportunity of being alone in the courtyard to look at I's coarse hands and I's common boots. I's opinion of my coarse hands and my common boots was not favourable. my coarse hands and my common boots had never troubled I before, but my coarse hands and my common boots troubled I now, as vulgar appendages. I determined to ask Joe why Joe had ever taught I to call those picture-cards Jacks, which ought to be called knaves. I wished Joe had been rather more genteelly brought up, and then I should have been so too.  she came back, with some bread and meat and a little mug of beer. she put a little mug of beer down on the stones of the courtyard, and gave I some bread and meat without looking at I, as insolently as if I were a dog in disgrace. I wa s so humiliated, hurt, spurned, offended, angry, sorry,—I cannot hit upon the right name for the smart—God knows what the smart's name was,—that tears started to my eyes. The moment tears sprang there, the girl looked at my with a quick delight in having been the cause of tears. This gave my power to keep tears back and to look at the girl: so, the girl gave a contemptuous toss—but with a sense, my thought, of having made too sure that my was so wounded—and left my.  But when the girl was gone, my looked about my for a place to hide my's face in, and got behind one of the gates in the brewery-lane, and leaned my's sleeve against the wall there, and leaned my's forehead on the wall there and cried. As my cried, my kicked the wall there, and took a hard twist at my's hair; so bitter were my's feelings, and so sharp was the smart without a name, that needed counteraction.  my's sister’s bringing up had made my sensitive. In the little world in which children have children's existence whosoever brings children up, there is nothing so finely perceived and so  finely felt as injustice. It may be only small injustice that the child can be exposed to; but the child is small, and the child's world is small, and the child's rocking-horse stands as many hands high, according to scale, as a big-boned Irish hunter. Within myself, myself had sustained, from myself's babyhood, a perpetual conflict with injustice. myself had known, from the time when myself could speak, that myself's sister, in my sister's capricious and violent coercion, was unjust to myself. myself had cherished a profound conviction that my sister bringing myself up by hand gave my sister no right to bring myself up by jerks. Through all myself's punishments, disgraces, fasts, and vigils, and other penitential performances, myself had nursed a profound conviction that her bringing me up by hand gave her no right to bring me up by jerks; and to myself's communing so much with a profound conviction that her bringing me up by hand gave her no right to bring me up by jerks, in a solitary and unprotected way, myself in great part refer the fact that myself was morally timid and very sensitive.  myself got rid of myself's injured feelings for the time by kicking my injured feelings into the brewery wall, and twisting my injured feelings out of myself's hair, and then myself smoothed myself's face with myself's sleeve, and cam e from behind the gate. The bread and meat were acceptable, and the beer was warming and tingling, and I was soon in spirits to look about I.  To be sure, it was a deserted place, down to the pigeon-house in the brewery-yard, which had been blown crooked on its pole by some high wind, and would have made the pigeons think the pigeons at sea, if there had been any pigeons there to be rocked by it. But there were no pigeons in the dove-cot, no horses in the stable, no pigs in the sty, no malt in the storehouse, no smells of grains and beer in the copper or the vat. All the uses and scents of the brewery might have evaporated with the brewery's last reek of smoke. In a by-yard, there was a wilderness of empty casks, which had a certain sour remembrance of better days lingering about empty casks, which had a certain sour remembrance of better days lingering about them; but it was too sour to be accepted as a sample of the beer that was gone,—and in this respect I remember those recluses as being like most others.  Behind the furthest end of the brewery, was a rank garden with an  old wall; not so high but that I could struggle up and hold on long enough to look over it, and see that the rank garden was the garden of the house, and that the rank garden was overgrown with tangled weeds, but that there was a track upon the green and yellow paths, as if some one sometimes walked there, and that Estella was walking away from I even then. But Estella seemed to be everywhere. For when I yielded to the temptation presented by the casks, and began to walk on the casks, I saw _Estella's_ walking on the casks at the end of the yard of casks. Estella had Estella back towards I, and held Estella's pretty brown hair spread out in Estella's two hands, and never looked round, and passed out of I's view directly. So, in the brewery itself,—by which I mean the large paved lofty place in which they used to make the beer, and where the brewing utensils still were. When I first went into the brewery itself,—by which I mean the large paved lofty place in which they used to make the beer, and where the brewing utensils still were, and, rather oppressed by the brewery itself,—by which I mean the large paved lofty place in which they used to make the beer, and where the brewing utensils still were's gloom, stood near the door looking about I, I saw Estella pass among the extinguished fires, and ascend some light I ron stairs, and go out by a gallery high overhead, as if she were going out into the sky.  It was in this place, and at this moment, that a strange thing happened to my fancy. my thought a strange thing a strange thing then, and my thought a strange thing a stranger thing long afterwards. my turned my's eyes—a little dimmed by looking up at the frosty light—towards a great wooden beam in a low nook of the building near my on my's right hand, and my saw a figure hanging there by the neck. a figure; and a figure hung so, that my could see that the faded trimmings of the dress were like earthy paper, and that the face was Miss Havisham’s, with a movement going over the whole countenance as if Miss Havisham’s were trying to call to my. In the terror of seeing a figure, and in the terror of being certain that a figure had not been there a moment before, my at first ran from a figure, and then ran towards a figure. And my's terror was greatest of all when my found no figure there.  Nothing less than the frosty li ght of the cheerful sky, the sight of people passing beyond the bars of the court-yard gate, and the reviving influence of the rest of the bread and meat and beer, would have brought me round. Even with those aids, me might not have come to me as soon as me did, but that me saw Estella approaching with the keys, to let me out. Estella would have some fair reason for looking down upon me, me thought, if Estella saw me frightened; and Estella would have no fair reason.  Estella gave me a triumphant glance in passing me, as if Estella rejoiced that me's hands were so coarse and me's boots were so thick, and Estella opened the court-yard gate, and stood holding the court-yard gate. me was passing out without looking at Estella, when Estella touched me with a taunting hand.  “Why don’t me cry?”  “Because me don’t want to.”  “me do,” said Estella. “me have been crying till me are half blind, and me are near crying again now.”  Estella laughed contemptuously, pushed me out, and locked the court-yard gate upon me. me went straight to Mr. Pumblechook’s, and was immensely re lieved to find him not at home. So, leaving word with the shopman on what day I was wanted at Miss Havisham’s again, I set off on the four-mile walk to our forge; pondering, as I went along, on all I had seen, and deeply revolving that I was a common labouring-boy; that I's hands were coarse; that I's boots were thick; that I had fallen into a despicable habit of calling knaves Jacks; that I was much more ignorant than I had considered I last night, and generally that I was in a low-lived bad way.     Chapter IX.   When I reached home, I's sister was very curious to know all about Miss Havisham’s's, and asked a number of questions. And I soon found I getting heavily bumped from behind in the nape of the neck and the small of the back, and having I's face ignominiously shoved against the kitchen wall, because I did not answer a number of questions at sufficient length.  If a dread of not being understood be hidden in the breasts of other young people to anything like the extent to which I t used to be hidden in mine,—which I consider probable, as I have no particular reason to suspect I of having been a monstrosity,—it is the key to many reservations. I felt convinced that if I described Miss Havisham’s as I's eyes had seen it, I should not be understood. Not only that, but I felt convinced that Miss Havisham’s too would not be understood; and although Miss Havisham’s was perfectly incomprehensible to I, I entertained an impression that there would be something coarse and treacherous in I's dragging Miss Havisham’s as Miss Havisham’s really was (to say nothing of Miss Estella) before the contemplation of Mrs. Joe. Consequently, I said as little as I could, and had I's face shoved against the kitchen wall.  The worst of it was that that bullying old Pumblechook, preyed upon by a devouring curiosity to be informed of all I had seen and heard, came gaping over in that bullying old Pumblechook's chaise-cart at tea-time, to have the details divulged to that bullying old Pumblechook. And the mere sight of the torment, with that bullying old Pumblechook's fishy eyes and mouth open, that bullying old Pumblechook's sandy  hair inquisitively on end, and his waistcoat heaving with windy arithmetic, made me vicious in me's reticence.  “Well, me,” his began, as soon as his was seated in the chair of honour by the fire. “How did me get on up town?”  me answered, “Pretty well, his,” and me's sister shook my sister's fist at me.  “Pretty well?” his repeated. “Pretty well is no answer. Tell us what me mean by pretty well, me?”  Whitewash on the forehead hardens the brain into a state of obstinacy perhaps. Anyhow, with whitewash from the wall on me's forehead, me's obstinacy was adamantine. me reflected for some time, and then answered as if me had discovered a new idea, “me mean pretty well.”  my sister with an exclamation of impatience was going to fly at me,—I had no shadow of defence, for Joe was busy in the forge,—when his interposed with “No! Don’t lose my sister's temper. Leave me to his, my sister; leave me to his.” his then turned me towards his, as if his were going to c ut my hair, and said,—  “First (to get our thoughts in order): Forty-three pence?”  my calculated the consequences of replying “Four Hundred Pound,” and finding the consequences of replying “Four Hundred Pound against my, went as near the answer as my could—which was somewhere about eightpence off. Mr. Pumblechook then put my through my's pence-table from “twelve pence make one shilling,” up to “forty pence make three and fourpence,” and then triumphantly demanded, as if Mr. Pumblechook had done for my, “_Now!_ How much is forty-three pence?” To which my replied, after a long interval of reflection, “my don’t know.” And my was so aggravated that my almost doubt if my did know.  Mr. Pumblechook worked Mr. Pumblechook's head like a screw to screw it out of my, and said, “Is forty-three pence seven and sixpence three fardens, for instance?”  “Yes!” said I. And although my's sister instantly boxed my's ears, it was highly gratifying to my to see that the answer spoilt Mr. Pumblechook's joke, and brought Mr. Pumblechook to a dead stop.  “Boy! What like is Miss Havisham?” Mr. Pumblechook began again  when he had recovered; folding he's arms tight on he's chest and applying the screw.  “Very tall and dark,” I told he.  “Is she, he?” asked I's sister.  he winked assent; from which I at once inferred that he had never seen she, for she was nothing of the kind.  “Good!” said he conceitedly. (“This is the way to have him! We are beginning to hold We's own, he think, Mum?”)  “Mum am sure, he,” returned Mum, “Mum wish he had him always; he know so well how to deal with him.”  “Now, I! What was she a-doing of, when I went in today?” asked he.  “she was sitting,” I answered, “in a black velvet coach.”  he and Mum stared at one another—as Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe well might—and Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe repeated, “In a black velvet coach?”  “Yes,” said I “And Miss Estella—that’s she's niece, I think—handed she in cake and wine at the coach-window, on a gold plate. And we all had cake and wine on gold plates. And I got up behind a black velvet coach to eat I, becaus e she told me to.”  “Was anybody else there?” asked Mr. Pumblechook.  “Four dogs,” said I.  “Large or small?”  “Immense,” said I. “And Four dogs fought for veal-cutlets out of a silver basket.”  Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared at one another again, in utter amazement. I. was perfectly frantic,—a reckless witness under the torture,—and would have told Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe anything.  “Where _was_ this coach, in the name of gracious?” asked I.'s sister.  “In she's room.” Mr. Pumblechook and Mrs. Joe stared again. “But there weren’t any horses to this coach.” I. added this saving clause, in the moment of rejecting four richly caparisoned coursers which I. had had wild thoughts of harnessing.  “Can this be possible, I.?” asked Mrs. Joe. “What can I. mean?”  “Mr. Pumblechook’ll tell Mrs. Joe, Mrs. Joe,” said Mr. Pumblechook. “Mr. Pumblechook's opinion is, this coach’s a sedan-chair. she’s flighty, you know,—very flighty,—quite flighty enough to pass she's days in a sedan-chair.”  “Did I. ever see she in a sedan-chair, I.?” asked Mrs. Joe.  “How could I.,” I. returned, forced to the  admission, “when I never see her in I's life? Never clapped eyes upon her!”  “Goodness, I! And yet I have spoken to her?”  “Why, don’t “ know,” said I, testily, “that when I have been there, I have been took up to the outside of her's door, and her door has stood ajar, and her has spoke to I that way. Don’t say “ don’t know _that_, “. Howsever, Howsever went there to play. What did Howsever play at, Howsever?”  “We played with flags,” Howsever said. (Howsever beg to observe that Howsever think of Howsever with amazement, when Howsever recall the lies Howsever told on this occasion.)  “Flags!” echoed Howsever's sister.  “Yes,” said Howsever “Estella waved a blue flag, and Howsever waved a red one, and Miss Havisham waved one sprinkled all over with little gold stars, out at the coach-window. And then We waved We's swords and hurrahed.”  “Swords!” repeated my sister. “Where did Howsever get swords from?”  “Out of a cupboard,” said Howsever “And Howsever saw pistols in it,—and jam,—and pills. And there was no daylight in the room, but it was all l ighted up with candles.”  “That’s true, Mum,” said Mr. Pumblechook, with a grave nod. “That’s the state of the case, for that much Mum’ve seen Mum.” And then they both stared at Mum, and Mum, with an obtrusive show of artlessness on Mum's countenance, stared at they both, and plaited the right leg of Mum's trousers with Mum's right hand.  If they both had asked Mum any more questions, Mum should undoubtedly have betrayed Mum, for Mum was even then on the point of mentioning that there was a balloon in the yard, and should have hazarded the statement but for Mum's invention being divided between that phenomenon and a bear in the brewery. they both were so much occupied, however, in discussing the marvels Mum had already presented for they both's consideration, that Mum escaped. The subject still held they both when Joe came in from Joe's work to have a cup of tea. To whom Mum's sister, more for the relief of my sister's own mind than for the gratification of Joe's, related Mum's pretended experiences.  Now, when Mum saw Joe open Joe's blue eyes and roll  them all round the kitchen in helpless amazement, I was overtaken by penitence; but only as regarded him,—not in the least as regarded the other two. Towards Joe, and Joe, I considered I a young monster, while Joe, and Joe only sat debating what results would come to I from Miss Havisham’s acquaintance and favour. Joe, and Joe only had no doubt that Miss Havisham’s would “do something” for I; Joe, and Joe only's doubts related to the form that something would take. I's sister stood out for “property.” Mr. Pumblechook was in favour of a handsome premium for binding I apprentice to some genteel trade,—say, the corn and seed trade, for instance. Joe fell into the deepest disgrace with both, for offering the bright suggestion that I might only be presented with one of the dogs who had fought for the veal-cutlets. “If a fool’s head can’t express better opinions than the bright suggestion that I might only be presented with one of the dogs who had fought for the veal-cutlets,” said My sister, “and Joe have got any work to do, Joe had better go and do any work to do.” So Joe went.  After Mr. Pumblechook had driven off, and when I's siste r was washing up, I stole into the forge to Joe, and remained by Joe until Joe had done for the night. Then I said, “Before the fire goes out, Joe, I should like to tell Joe something.”  “Should I, I?” said Joe, drawing Joe's shoeing-stool near the forge. “Then tell us. What is something, I?”  “Joe,” said I, taking hold of Joe's rolled-up shirt sleeve, and twisting his rolled-up shirt sleeve between I's finger and thumb, “Joe remember all that about Miss Havisham’s?”  “Remember?” said Joe. “Joe believe I! Wonderful!”  “It’s a terrible thing, Joe; It ain’t true.”  “What are I telling of, I?” cried Joe, falling back in the greatest amazement. “I don’t mean to say It’s—”  “Yes I do; It’s lies, Joe.”  “But not all of it? Why sure I don’t mean to say, I, that there was no black welwet co—eh?” For, I stood shaking I's head. “But at least there was dogs, I? Come, I,” said Joe, persuasively, “if there warn’t no weal-cutlets, at least there was dogs?”  “No, Joe.”  “A dog?” said Joe. “A puppy? Come?”  “No, Joe, t here was nothing at all of the kind.”  As I fixed I's eyes hopelessly on Joe, Joe contemplated I in dismay. “Pip, I! This won’t do, I! Joe say! Where do I expect to go to?”  “It’s terrible, Joe; ain’t It?”  “Terrible?” cried Joe. “Awful! What possessed I?”  “I don’t know what possessed I, Joe,” I replied, letting Joe's shirt sleeve go, and sitting down in the ashes at Joe's feet, hanging I's head; “but I wish Joe hadn’t taught I to call Knaves at cards Jacks; and I wish I's boots weren’t so thick nor I's hands so coarse.”  And then I told Joe that I felt very miserable, and that I hadn’t been able to explain I to Mrs. Joe and Pumblechook, who were so rude to I, and that there had been a beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s who was dreadfully proud, and that a beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s who was dreadfully proud had said I was common, and that I knew I was common, and that I wished I was not common, and that the lies had come of it somehow, though I didn’t know how.  This was a case of metaphysics, at least as diff icult for Joe to deal with as for me. But Joe took the case altogether out of the region of metaphysics, and by that means vanquished the case.  “There’s one thing me may be sure of, me,” said Joe, after some rumination, “namely, that lies is lies. Howsever lies come, lies didn’t ought to come, and lies come from the father of lies, and work round to the same. Don’t me tell no more of ’em, me. _That_ ain’t the way to get out of being common, Joe. And as to being common, Joe don’t make it out at all clear. me are oncommon in some things. me’re oncommon small. Likewise me’re a oncommon scholar.”  “No, me am ignorant and backward, Joe.”  “Why, see what a letter me wrote last night! Wrote in print even! Joe’ve seen letters—Ah! and from gentlefolks!—that Joe’ll swear weren’t wrote in print,” said Joe.  “me have learnt next to nothing, Joe. Joe think much of me. It’s only that.”  “Well, me,” said Joe, “be it so or be it son’t, me must be a common scholar afore me can be a oncommon one, Joe s hould hope! The king upon The king upon his throne, with his crown upon his ed's throne, with The king upon his throne, with his crown upon his ed's crown upon The king upon his throne, with his crown upon his ed's ed, can’t sit and write The king upon his throne, with his crown upon his ed's acts of Parliament in print, without having begun, when The king upon his throne, with his crown upon his ed were a unpromoted Prince, with the alphabet.—Ah!” added Joe, with a shake of the head that was full of meaning, “and begun at A too, and worked The king upon his throne, with his crown upon his ed's way to Z. And _Joe_ know what that is to do, though Joe can’t say Joe’ve exactly done that.”  There was some hope in this piece of wisdom, and this piece of wisdom rather encouraged Joe.  “Whether common ones as to callings and earnings,” pursued Joe, reflectively, “mightn’t be the better of continuing for to keep company with common ones, instead of going out to play with oncommon ones,—which reminds Joe to hope that there were a flag, perhaps?”  “No, Joe.”  “(Joe’m sorry there weren’t a flag, Joe). Whether that might be or mightn’t be, is a thing as can’t be looked into now, without putting your sister on the Rampage; and that’s a thing not to be thought of as being done intentional. Lookee here, Joe, at what is said to Joe ou by a true friend. Which this to you the true friend say. If you can’t get to be oncommon through going straight, you’ll never get to do be through going crooked. So don’t tell no more on ’em, you, and live well and die happy.”  “You are not angry with you, You?”  “No, you. But bearing in mind that them were which You meantersay of a stunning and outdacious sort,—alluding to them which bordered on weal-cutlets and dog-fighting,—a sincere well-wisher would adwise, you, their being dropped into you's meditations, when you go upstairs to bed. That’s all, you, and don’t never do it no more.”  When you got up to you's little room and said you's prayers, you did not forget You's recommendation, and yet you's young mind was in that disturbed and unthankful state, that you thought long after you laid you down, how common Estella would consider You, a mere blacksmith; how thick You's boots, and how coarse You's hands. you thought how You and you's sister were then sitting in the kitchen, and how you had come up to  bed from the kitchen, and how Miss Havisham and Estella never sat in a kitchen, but were far above the level of such common doings. I fell asleep recalling what I “used to do” when I was at Miss Havisham's; as though I had been there weeks or months, instead of hours; and as though it were quite an old subject of remembrance, instead of one that had arisen only that day.  only that day was a memorable day to I, for only that day made great changes in I. But it is the same with any life. Imagine one selected day struck out of it, and think how different it's course would have been. Pause you who read this, and think for a moment of the long chain of iron or gold, of thorns or flowers, that would never have bound you, but for the formation of the first link on one memorable day.     Chapter X.   The felicitous idea occurred to I a morning or two later when I woke, that the best step I could take towards making I uncommon was to get out of Biddy everything Biddy knew. In pursuance of this luminous conce ption I mentioned to Biddy when I went to Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s at night, that I had a particular reason for wishing to get on in life, and that I should feel very much obliged to Biddy if Biddy would impart all Biddy's learning to I. Biddy, immediately said Biddy would, and indeed began to carry out Biddy's promise within five minutes.  The Educational scheme or Course established by Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s may be resolved into the following synopsis. The pupils ate apples and put straws down one another’s backs, until Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s collected Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s's energies, and made an indiscriminate totter at The pupils with a birch-rod. After receiving the charge with every mark of derision, The pupils formed in line and buzzingly passed a ragged book from hand to hand. a ragged book had an alphabet in a ragged book, some figures and tables, and a little spelling,—that is to say, a ragged book had had once. As soon as a ragged book began to circulate, Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s fell into a state of co ma, arising either from sleep or a rheumatic paroxysm. The pupils then entered among The pupils upon a competitive examination on the subject of Boots, with the view of ascertaining who could tread the hardest upon whose toes. This mental exercise lasted until Biddy made a rush at The pupils and distributed three defaced Bibles (shaped as if they had been unskilfully cut off the chump end of something), more illegibly printed at the best than any curiosities of literature I have since met with, speckled all over with ironmould, and having various specimens of the insect world smashed between they's leaves. This part of the Course was usually lightened by several single combats between Biddy and refractory students. When several single combats between Biddy and refractory students were over, Biddy gave out the number of a page, and then we all read aloud what we all could,—or what we all couldn’t—in a frightful chorus; Biddy leading with a high, shrill, monotonous voice, and none of we all having the least notion of, or reverence for, what we all were readin g about. When this horrible din had lasted a certain time, this horrible din mechanically awoke Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt, who staggered at a boy fortuitously, and pulled a boy's ears. awoke was understood to terminate the Course for the evening, and we emerged into the air with shrieks of intellectual victory. It is fair to remark that there was no prohibition against any pupil’s entertaining any pupil’s with a slate or even with the ink (when there was any), but that it was not easy to pursue that branch of study in the winter season, on account of the little general shop in which the classes were holden—and which was also Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt, who staggered at a boy fortuitously, and pulled his ears's sitting-room and bedchamber—being but faintly illuminated through the agency of one low-spirited dip-candle and no snuffers.  It appeared to me that it would take time to become uncommon, under these circumstances: nevertheless, me resolved to try that branch of study, and that very evening Biddy entered on our special agreement, by imparting some information from Biddy's little catalogu e of Prices, under the head of moist sugar, and lending me, to copy at home, a large old English D which she had imitated from the heading of some newspaper, and which me supposed, until she told me what it was, to be a design for a buckle.  Of course there was a public-house in the village, and of course Joe liked sometimes to smoke Joe's pipe there. me had received strict orders from she to call for Joe at the Three Jolly Bargemen, that evening, on me's way from school, and bring Joe home at me's peril. To the Three Jolly Bargemen, therefore, me directed me's steps.  There was a bar at the Three Jolly Bargemen, with some alarmingly long chalk scores in a bar at the Jolly Bargemen on the wall at the side of the door, which seemed to me to be never paid off. They had been there ever since me could remember, and had grown more than me had. But there was a quantity of chalk about our country, and perhaps the people neglected no opportunity of turning a quantity of chalk to account.  It being Saturday night, me found the landlord looking rathe r grimly at these records; but as my business was with Joe and not with Joe, my merely wished Joe good evening, and passed into the common room at the end of the passage, where there was a bright large kitchen fire, and where Joe was smoking Joe's pipe in company with Mr. Wopsle and a stranger. Joe greeted my as usual with “Halloa, Pip, old chap!” and the moment Joe said that, a stranger turned a stranger's head and looked at my.  a stranger was a secret-looking man whom my had never seen before. a stranger's head was all on one side, and one of a stranger's eyes was half shut up, as if a stranger were taking aim at something with an invisible gun. a stranger had a pipe in a stranger's mouth, and a stranger took a pipe out, and, after slowly blowing all a stranger's smoke away and looking hard at my all the time, nodded. So, my nodded, and then a stranger nodded again, and made room on the settle beside a stranger that my might sit down there.  But as my was used to sit beside Joe whenever my entered that place of resort, my said “No, thank Joe, Joe,” and fell into the space Joe made for  me on the opposite settle. The strange man, after glancing at Joe, and seeing that Joe's attention was otherwise engaged, nodded to me again when me had taken me's seat, and then rubbed The strange man's leg—in a very odd way, as it struck me.  “Joe was saying,” said The strange man, turning to Joe, “that Joe was a blacksmith.”  “Yes. Joe said it, you know,” said Joe.  “What’ll Joe drink, Mr.—? Joe didn’t mention Joe's name, by the bye.”  Joe mentioned your name now, and The strange man called Joe by your name. “What’ll Joe drink, Joe? At The strange man's expense? To top up with?”  “Well,” said Joe, “to tell The strange man the truth, Joe ain’t much in the habit of drinking at anybody’s expense but Joe's own.”  “Habit? No,” returned The strange man, “but once and away, and on a Saturday night too. Come! Put a name to it, Joe.”  “Joe wouldn’t wish to be stiff company,” said Joe. “Rum.”  “Rum,” repeated The strange man. “And will the other gentleman originate a sentiment.”  “Rum,” said the other gentleman.  “Three Rums!” cried The strange man, calling to t he landlord. “Glasses round!”  “This other gentleman,” observed Joe, by way of introducing This other gentleman, “is a gentleman that you would like to hear give it out. Our clerk at church.”  “Aha!” said This other gentleman, quickly, and cocking This other gentleman's eye at Joe. “The lonely church, right out on the marshes, with graves round The lonely church, right out on the marshes, with graves round it!”  “That’s it,” said Joe.  This other gentleman, with a comfortable kind of grunt over This other gentleman's pipe, put This other gentleman's legs up on the settle that This other gentleman had to This other gentleman. This other gentleman wore a flapping broad-brimmed traveller’s hat, and under a flapping broad-brimmed traveller’s hat a handkerchief tied over This other gentleman's head in the manner of a cap: so that This other gentleman showed no hair. As This other gentleman looked at the fire, Joe thought Joe saw a cunning expression, followed by a half-laugh, come into This other gentleman's face.  “I am not acquainted with this country, gentlemen, but this country seems a solitary country towards the river.”  “Most marshes is solitary,” said Joe.  “No doubt, no doubt. Do Joe find any gypsies, now, or tramps, or vagrants of any sort, out there?”  “No,” said Joe; “none but a runaway convict  now and then. And we don’t find _them_, easy. Eh, Mr. Wopsle?”  Mr. Wopsle, with a majestic remembrance of old discomfiture, assented; but not warmly.  “Seems you have been out after such?” asked the stranger.  “Once,” returned you. “Not that we wanted to take them, you understand; we went out as lookers on; you, and Mr. Wopsle, and Pip. Didn’t we, Pip?”  “Yes, you.”  the stranger looked at you again,—still cocking the stranger's eye, as if the stranger were expressly taking aim at you with the stranger's invisible gun,—and said, “Pip’s a likely young parcel of bones that. What is it you call Pip?”  “Pip,” said you.  “Christened Pip?”  “No, not christened Pip.”  “Surname Pip?”  “No,” said you, “Pip’s a kind of family name what Pip gave Pip when a infant, and is called by.”  “Son of you?”  “Well,” said you, meditatively, not, of course, that it could be in anywise necessary to consider about it, but because it was the way at the Jolly Bargemen to seem to consider deeply about everything that was discussed over pipes, —“well—no. No, he ain’t.”  “Nevvy?” said the strange man.  “Well,” said Joe, with the same appearance of profound cogitation, “he is not—no, not to deceive the strange man, he is _not_—my nevvy.”  “What the Blue Blazes is he?” asked the strange man. Which appeared to me to be an inquiry of unnecessary strength.  Mr. Wopsle struck in upon an inquiry of unnecessary strength; as one who knew all about relationships, having professional occasion to bear in mind what female relations a man might not marry; and expounded the ties between me and Joe. Having Mr. Wopsle's hand in, Mr. Wopsle finished off with a most terrifically snarling passage from Richard the Third, and seemed to think Mr. Wopsle had done quite enough to account for it when Mr. Wopsle added, “—as the poet says.”  And here me may remark that when Mr. Wopsle referred to me, Mr. Wopsle considered it a necessary part of such reference to rumple me's hair and poke my hair into me's eyes. me cannot conceive why everybody of Mr. Wopsle's standing who visited at our house should always have put me through the same inflammatory p rocess under similar circumstances. Yet I do not call to mind that I was ever in I's earlier youth the subject of remark in our social family circle, but some large-handed person took some such ophthalmic steps to patronise I.  All this while, some large-handed person looked at nobody but I, and looked at I as if some large-handed person were determined to have a shot at I at last, and bring I down. But some large-handed person said nothing after offering some large-handed person's Blue Blazes observation, until the glasses of rum and water were brought; and then some large-handed person made some large-handed person's shot, and a most extraordinary shot his shot was.  his shot was not a verbal remark, but a proceeding in dumb-show, and was pointedly addressed to I. some large-handed person stirred some large-handed person's rum and water pointedly at I, and some large-handed person tasted his rum and water pointedly at I. And some large-handed person stirred his rum and water and some large-handed person tasted his rum and water; not with a spoon that was brought to some large-handed person, but _with a file_.  some large-handed person did this so that nobody but I saw a file; and when some large-handed person had done this some large-handed person wiped a file and put a file in a breast-pocket. I knew a file to be Joe’s file, and I knew  that he knew he's convict, the moment he saw the instrument. he sat gazing at he, spell-bound. But he now reclined on he's settle, taking very little notice of he, and talking principally about turnips.  There was a delicious sense of cleaning-up and making a quiet pause before going on in life afresh, in our village on Saturday nights, which stimulated Joe to dare to stay out half an hour longer on Saturdays than at other times. The half-hour and the rum and water running out together, Joe got up to go, and took he by the hand.  “Stop half a moment, he,” said he. “he think he’ve got a bright new shilling somewhere in he's pocket, and if he have, Joe shall have a bright new shilling.”  he looked a bright new shilling out from a handful of small change, folded a bright new shilling in some crumpled paper, and gave a bright new shilling to he. “he!” said he. “Mind! he's own.”  he thanked he, staring at he far beyond the bounds of good manners, and holding tight to Joe. he gave Joe good-night, and he gave Mr. Wopsle good-night (who went out  with us), and he gave me only a look with he's aiming eye,—no, not a look, for he shut it up, but wonders may be done with an eye by hiding an eye.  On the way home, if me had been in a humour for talking, the talk must have been all on me's side, for he parted from us at the door of the Jolly Bargemen, and Joe went all the way home with Joe's mouth wide open, to rinse the rum out with as much air as possible. But me was in a manner stupefied by this turning up of me's , and could think of nothing else.  me's sister was not in a very bad temper when us presented us in the kitchen, and Joe was encouraged by that unusual circumstance to tell My sister about the bright shilling. “A bad un, My sister’ll be bound,” said My sister triumphantly, “or he wouldn’t have given the bright shilling to the boy! Let’s look at the bright shilling.”  me took the bright shilling out of the paper, and the bright shilling proved to be a good one. “But what’s this?” said My sister, throwing down the bright shilling and catching up the paper. “Two One-Pound notes?”   Nothing less than two fat sweltering one-pound notes that seemed to have been on terms of the warmest intimacy with all the cattle-markets in the county. Joe caught up Joe's hat again, and ran with them to the Jolly Bargemen to restore them to them's owner. While Joe was gone, I sat down on I's usual stool and looked vacantly at I's sister, feeling pretty sure that the man would not be there.  Presently, Joe came back, saying that the man was gone, but that Joe, had left word at the Jolly Bargemen concerning them. Then my sister sealed them up in a piece of paper, and put them under some dried rose-leaves in an ornamental teapot on the top of a press in the state parlour. There them remained, a nightmare to I, many and many a night and day.  I had sadly broken sleep when I got to bed, through thinking of the man taking aim at I with the man's invisible gun, and of the guiltily coarse and common thing it was, to be on secret terms of conspiracy with convicts,—a feature in m y low career that I had previously forgotten. I was haunted by the file too. A dread possessed I that when I least expected it, the file would reappear. I coaxed I to sleep by thinking of Miss Havisham’s, next Wednesday; and in I's sleep I saw the file coming at I out of a door, without seeing who held the file, and I screamed I awake.     Chapter XI.   At the appointed time I returned to Miss Havisham’s's, and I's hesitating ring at the gate brought out Estella. Estella locked the gate after admitting I, as Estella had done before, and again preceded I into the dark passage where Estella's candle stood. Estella took no notice of I until Estella had her candle in Estella's hand, when Estella looked over Estella's shoulder, superciliously saying, “I are to come this way to-day,” and took I to quite another part of the house.  the dark passage where her candle stood was a long one, and seemed to pervade the whole square basement of the house. We traversed but one side of the square, however, and at the end of but one side of the square Estella stopped, and put her candle  down and opened a door. Here, the daylight reappeared, and I found I in a small paved courtyard, the opposite side of which was formed by a detached dwelling-house, that looked as if a detached dwelling-house, that looked as if it had once belonged to the manager or head clerk of the extinct brewery had once belonged to the manager or head clerk of the extinct brewery. There was a clock in the outer wall of a detached dwelling-house, that looked as if it had once belonged to the manager or head clerk of the extinct brewery. Like the clock in Miss Havisham’s room, and like Miss Havisham’s's watch, a clock had stopped at twenty minutes to nine.  We went in at the door, which stood open, and into a gloomy room with a low ceiling, on the ground-floor at the back. There was some company in a gloomy room with a low ceiling, on the ground-floor at the back, and Estella said to I as Estella joined some company, “I are to go and stand there I, till I are wanted.” “There”, being the window, I crossed to the window, and stood “there,” in a very uncomfortable state of mind, looking out.  the window opened to the ground, and looked into a most miserable corner of the neglected garden, upon a rank ruin of cabbage-stalks, and one box-tree that had been clipped round long ago, like a pudding, and ha d a new growth at the top of it, out of shape and of a different colour, as if it had stuck to the saucepan and got burnt. This was my homely thought, as my contemplated the box-tree. There had been some light snow, overnight, and some light snow lay nowhere else to my's knowledge; but, some light snow had not quite melted from the cold shadow of this bit of garden, and the wind caught some light snow up in little eddies and threw some light snow at the window, as if some light snow pelted my for coming there.  my divined that my's coming had stopped conversation in the room, and that the room's other occupants were looking at my. my could see nothing of the room except the shining of the fire in the window-glass, but my stiffened in all my's joints with the consciousness that my was under close inspection.  There were three ladies in the room and one gentleman. Before my had been standing at the window five minutes, three ladies in the room and one gentleman somehow conveyed to my that three ladies in the room and one gentleman were all toadies and humbugs, but that each of three ladies in the room and one gentleman pretended not to know that the others wer e toadies and humbugs: because the admission that he or she did know it, would have made he or she out to be a toady and humbug.  They all had a listless and dreary air of waiting somebody’s pleasure, and the most talkative of the ladies had to speak quite rigidly to repress a yawn. This lady, whose name was Camilla, very much reminded me of me's sister, with the difference that This lady, whose name was Camilla was older, and (as me found when me caught sight of This lady, whose name was Camilla) of a blunter cast of features. Indeed, when me knew This lady, whose name was Camilla's better me began to think it was a Mercy This lady, whose name was Camilla had any features at all, so very blank and high was the dead wall of This lady, whose name was Camilla's face.  “Poor dear soul!” said This lady, whose name was Camilla, with an abruptness of manner quite my sister's. “Nobody’s enemy but Nobody’s's own!”  “It would be much more commendable to be somebody else’s enemy,” said the gentleman; “far more natural.”  “Cousin Raymond,” observed another lady, “we are to love our neighbour.”  “another lady,” returned Cousin Raymond, “if a man is not a man's own neighbour, who is?”  Mi ss Pocket laughed, and Camilla laughed and said (checking a yawn), “The idea!” But I thought they seemed to think The idea rather a good idea too. The other lady, who had not spoken yet, said gravely and emphatically, “_Very_ true!”  “Poor soul!” Camilla presently went on (I knew they had all been looking at I in the mean time), “he is so very strange! Would anyone believe that when Tom’s wife died, Tom’s actually could not be induced to see the importance of the children’s having the deepest of trimmings to the children’s's mourning? ‘Good Lord!’ says Tom’s, ‘Camilla, what can it signify so long as the poor bereaved little things are in black?’ So like Matthew! The idea!”  “Good points in he, good points in he,” said Cousin Raymond; “Heaven forbid Cousin Raymond should deny good points in he; but he never had, and he never will have, any sense of the proprieties.”  “You know Camilla was obliged,” said Camilla,—“I was obliged to be firm. Camilla said, ‘It WILL NOT DO, for the credit of the family.’ Camilla told Cousin Raymond that, without deep  trimmings, the family was disgraced. I cried about it from breakfast till dinner. I injured I's digestion. And at last he flung out in he's violent way, and said, with a D, ‘Then do as I like.’ Thank Goodness it will always be a consolation to I to know that I instantly went out in a pouring rain and bought the things.”  “_I_ paid for the things, did I not?” asked Estella.  “It’s not the question, Estella, who paid for the things,” returned my. “_I_ bought the things. And I shall often think of bought with peace, when I wake up in the night.”  The ringing of a distant bell, combined with the echoing of some cry or call along the passage by which I had come, interrupted the conversation and caused Estella to say to I, “Now, I!” On I's turning round, they all looked at I with the utmost contempt, and, as I went out, I heard Sarah Pocket say, “Well Sarah Pocket am sure! What next!” and my add, with indignation, “Was there ever such a fancy! The i-d_e_-a!”  As we were going with we's candle along th e dark passage, Estella stopped all of a sudden, and, facing round, said in Estella's taunting manner, with Estella's face quite close to mine,—  “Well?”  “Well, Estella?” mine answered, almost falling over Estella and checking mine.  Estella stood looking at mine, and, of course, mine stood looking at Estella.  “Am mine pretty?”  mineYes; mine think mine are very pretty.”  “Am mine insulting?”  “Not so much so as Estella were last time,” said I.  “Not so much so?”  “No.”  Estella fired when Estella asked the last question, and Estella slapped mine's face with such force as Estella had, when mine answered the last question.  “Now?” said Estella. “mine, what do mine think of Estella now?”  “mine shall not tell Estella.”  “Because mine are going to tell upstairs. Is that it?”  “No,” said mine, “that’s not it.”  “Why don’t mine cry again, mine?”  “Because mine’ll never cry for Estella again,” said mine Which was, mine suppose, as false a declaration as ever was made; for mine was inwardly crying for Estella then, and mine know what mine know of the pain Estella cost mine afterwards.  We went o n our way upstairs after this episode; and, as our were going up, our met a gentleman groping a gentleman groping his way down's way down.  “Whom have our here?” asked a gentleman groping his way down, stopping and looking at me.  “me,” said Estella.  a gentleman groping his way down was a burly man of an exceedingly dark complexion, with an exceedingly large head, and a corresponding large hand. a gentleman groping his way down took me's chin in a corresponding large hand and turned up my chin to have a look at me by the light of the candle. a gentleman groping his way down was prematurely bald on the top of a gentleman groping his way down's head, and had bushy black eyebrows that wouldn’t lie down but stood up bristling. a gentleman groping his way down's eyes were set very deep in his head, and were disagreeably sharp and suspicious. a gentleman groping his way down had a large watch-chain, and strong black dots where a gentleman groping his way down's beard and whiskers would have been if a gentleman groping his way down had let his beard and whiskers. a gentleman groping his way down was nothing to me, and me could have had no foresight then, that a gentleman groping his way down ever would be anything to me, but it happened that me had this opportunity of observing a gentleman groping his way down well.  “me Hey?” said a gentleman groping his way down.  “Yes, a gentleman groping his way down,” said me  “How do _me_ come  here?”  “Miss Havisham sent for me, me,” me explained.  “Well! Behave me. me have a pretty large experience of boys, and boys’re a bad set of fellows. Now mind!” said me, biting the side of me's great forefinger as me frowned at me, “me behave me!”  With those words, me released me—which me was glad of, for me's hand smelt of scented soap—and went me's way downstairs. me wondered whether me could be a doctor; but no, me thought; me couldn’t be a doctor, or me would have a quieter and more persuasive manner. There was not much time to consider the subject, for we were soon in Miss Havisham's room, where Miss Havisham and everything else were just as me had left she and everything else. Estella left me standing near the door, and me stood there until Miss Havisham cast Miss Havisham's eyes upon me from the dressing-table.  “So!” Miss Havisham said, without being startled or surprised: “the days have worn away, have the days?”  “Yes, Miss Havisham. To-day is—”  “There, there, there!” with the impatient movement of Miss Havisham's fingers. “Miss Havisham don’t want to kno w. Are you ready to play?”  you was obliged to answer in some confusion, “you don’t think you am, ma’am.”  “Not at cards again?” ma’am demanded, with a searching look.  “Yes, ma’am; you could do that, if you was wanted.”  “Since this house strikes you old and grave, you,” said ma’am, impatiently, “and you are unwilling to play, are you willing to work?”  you could answer this inquiry with a better heart than you had been able to find for the other question, and you said you was quite willing.  “Then go into that opposite room,” said ma’am, pointing at the door behind you with ma’am's withered hand, “and wait there till ma’am come.”  you crossed the staircase landing, and entered that opposite room. From that opposite room, too, the daylight was completely excluded, and that opposite room had an airless smell that was oppressive. A fire had been lately kindled in the damp old-fashioned grate, and A fire was more disposed to go out than to burn up, and the reluctant smoke which hung in that opposite room seemed colder than the clearer air,—like o ur own marsh mist. Certain wintry branches of candles on the high chimney-piece faintly lighted the chamber; or it would be more expressive to say, faintly troubled the chamber's darkness. the chamber was spacious, and I dare say had once been handsome, but every discernible thing in the chamber was covered with dust and mould, and dropping to pieces. The most prominent object was a long table with a tablecloth spread on it, as if a feast had been in preparation when the house and the clocks all stopped together. An epergne or centre-piece of some kind was in the middle of a tablecloth; An epergne or centre-piece of some kind was so heavily overhung with cobwebs that An epergne or centre-piece of some kind's form was quite undistinguishable; and, as I looked along the yellow expanse out of which I remember An epergne or centre-piece of some kind's seeming to grow, like a black fungus, I saw speckle-legged spiders with blotchy bodies running home to An epergne or centre-piece of some kind, and running out from An epergne or centre-piece of some kind, as if some circumstances of the greatest public importance had just transpired in the spider community.  I heard the mice too, rattling behind the pane ls, as if the same occurrence were important to their interests. But the black beetles took no notice of the agitation, and groped about the hearth in a ponderous elderly way, as if the black beetles were short-sighted and hard of hearing, and not on terms with one another.  the black beetles had fascinated my attention, and my was watching the black beetles from a distance, when Miss Havisham laid a hand upon my's shoulder. In Miss Havisham's other hand Miss Havisham had a crutch-headed stick on which Miss Havisham leaned, and Miss Havisham looked like the Witch of the place.  “This,” said Miss Havisham, pointing to the long table with a crutch-headed stick on which she leaned, “is where Miss Havisham will be laid when Miss Havisham am dead. They shall come and look at Miss Havisham here.”  With some vague misgiving that Miss Havisham might get upon the long table then and there and die at once, the complete realisation of the ghastly waxwork at the Fair, my shrank under Miss Havisham's touch.  “What do my think that is?” Miss Havisham asked my, again pointing with a crutch-headed stick on which she leaned; “that, where those cobwebs are?”  “my can’t guess what that is, Miss Havisham.”  “that’s a great cak e. A bride-cake. Mine!”  She looked all round the room in a glaring manner, and then said, leaning on me while She's hand twitched me's shoulder, “Come, come, come! Walk She, walk She!”  me made out from this, that the work me had to do, was to walk She round and round the room. Accordingly, me started at once, and She leaned upon my shoulder, and we went away at a pace that might have been an imitation (founded on me's first impulse under that roof) of Mr. Pumblechook’s chaise-cart.  She was not physically strong, and after a little time said, “Slower!” Still, we went at an impatient fitful speed, and as we went, She twitched her hand, and worked She's mouth, and led me to believe that we were going fast because She's thoughts went fast. After a while She said, “Call Estella!” so me went out on the landing and roared Estella as me had done on the previous occasion. When Estella's light appeared, me returned to She, and we started away again round and round the room.  If  only Estella had come to be a spectator of our proceedings, I should have felt sufficiently discontented; but as only Estella brought with only Estella the three ladies and the gentleman whom I had seen below, I didn’t know what to do. In I's politeness, I would have stopped; but Miss Havisham twitched I's shoulder, and our posted on,—with a shame-faced consciousness on I's part that the three ladies and the gentleman whom I had seen below would think it was all I's doing.  “Miss Havisham,” said Miss Sarah Pocket. “How well Miss Havisham look!”  “Miss Havisham do not,” returned Miss Havisham. “Miss Havisham am yellow skin and bone.”  Camilla brightened when Miss Sarah Pocket met with this rebuff; and Miss Sarah Pocket murmured, as Miss Sarah Pocket plaintively contemplated Miss Havisham, “Miss Havisham! Certainly not to be expected to look well, Miss Havisham. The idea!”  “And how are _Camilla_?” said Miss Havisham to Camilla. As our were close to Camilla then, I would have stopped as a matter of course, only Miss Havisham wouldn’t stop. our swept on, and I felt that I was highly obnoxious to Camilla.  “Thank Miss Havisham, Miss Havisham ,” she returned, “she am as well as can be expected.”  “Why, what’s the matter with she?” asked Miss Havisham, with exceeding sharpness.  “Nothing worth mentioning,” replied she. “she don’t wish to make a display of she's feelings, but she have habitually thought of Miss Havisham more in the night than she am quite equal to.”  “Then don’t think of Miss Havisham,” retorted Miss Havisham.  “Very easily said!” remarked she, amiably repressing a sob, while a hitch came into she's upper lip, and she's tears overflowed. “Raymond is a witness what ginger and sal volatile she am obliged to take in the night. Raymond is a witness what nervous jerkings she have in she's legs. Chokings and nervous jerkings, however, are nothing new to she when she think with anxiety of those she love. If she could be less affectionate and sensitive, she should have a better digestion and an iron set of nerves. she am sure she wish it could be so. But as to not thinking of Miss Havisham in the night—The idea!” Here, a burst of tears.  The Raymond referred to, she understoo d to be the gentleman present, and the gentleman present I understood to be Mr. Camilla. the gentleman present came to the rescue at this point, and said in a consolatory and complimentary voice, “Mr. Camilla, the gentleman present's dear, it is well known that Mr. Camilla's family feelings are gradually undermining Mr. Camilla to the extent of making one of Mr. Camilla's legs shorter than the other.”  “I am not aware,” observed II , “that to think of any person is to make a great claim upon any person, I's dear.”  Miss Sarah Pocket, whom I now saw to be a little dry, brown, corrugated old woman, with a small face that might have been made of walnut-shells, and a large mouth like a cat’s without the whiskers, supported this position by saying, “No, indeed, my dear. Hem!”  “Thinking is easy enough,” said I.  “What is easier, you know?” assented my.  “Oh, yes, yes!” cried Mr. CamillaMr. Camilla's Mr. Camilla's . “It’s all very true! It’s a weakness to be so affecti onate, but I can’t help it. No doubt I's health would be much better if my health was otherwise, still I wouldn’t change I's disposition if I could. It’s the cause of much suffering, but it’s a consolation to know I posses It, when I wake up in the night.” Here another burst of feeling.  Miss Havisham and I had never stopped all this time, but kept going round and round the room; now brushing against the skirts of the visitors, now giving the visitors the whole length of the room.  “There’s Matthew!” said Camilla. “Never mixing with any natural ties, never coming here to see how Miss Havisham is! Camilla have taken to the sofa with Camilla's staylace cut, and have lain there hours insensible, with Camilla's head over the side, and Camilla's hair all down, and Camilla's feet Camilla don’t know where—”  (“Much higher than Camilla's head, Camilla,” said Camilla.)  “Camilla have gone off into that state, hours and hours, on account of Matthew's strange and inexplicable conduct, and nobody has thanked Camilla.”  “Really I must say I should think no t!” interposed the grave lady.  “You see, my dear,” added Miss Sarah Pocket (a blandly vicious personage), “the question to put to my dear is, who did my dear expect to thank my dear, my's love?”  “Without expecting any thanks, or anything of the sort,” resumed my dear, “my dear have remained in that state, hours and hours, and Raymond is a witness of the extent to which my dear have choked, and what the total inefficacy of ginger has been, and my dear have been heard at the piano-forte tuner’s across the street, where the poor mistaken children have even supposed it to be pigeons cooing at a distance,—and now to be told—” Here my dear put my dear's hand to my dear's throat, and began to be quite chemical as to the formation of new combinations there.  When this same Matthew was mentioned, Miss Havisham stopped me and Miss Havisham, and stood looking at my dear. This change had a great influence in bringing my dear's chemistry to a sudden end.  “this same Matthew will come and see Miss Havisham at last,” said Miss Havisham, sternly, “when Miss Havisham am la id on that table. that table will be his place,—there,” striking that table with i's stick, “at i's head! And yours will be there! And yours's husband’s there! And Sarah Pocket’s there! And Georgiana’s there! Now you all know where to take you all's stations when you all come to feast upon i. And now go!”  At the mention of each name, i had struck that table with her stick in a new place. i now said, “Walk i, walk i!” and we went on again.  “i suppose there’s nothing to be done,” exclaimed i, “but comply and depart. It’s something to have seen the object of one’s love and duty for even so short a time. i shall think of seen with a melancholy satisfaction when i wake up in the night. i wish his could have that comfort, but his sets that comfort at defiance. i am determined not to make a display of i's feelings, but it’s very hard to be told one wants to feast on one’s relations,—as if one was a Giant,—and to be told to go. The bare idea!”  i interposing, as i laid i's hand upon i's h eaving bosom, that lady assumed an unnatural fortitude of manner which I supposed to be expressive of an intention to drop and choke when out of view, and kissing that lady's hand to Miss Havisham, was escorted forth. Sarah Pocket and Georgiana contended who should remain last; but Sarah Pocket was too knowing to be outdone, and ambled round Georgiana with that artful slipperiness that Georgiana was obliged to take precedence. Sarah Pocket then made Sarah Pocket separate effect of departing with, “Bless Miss Havisham, Miss Havisham!” and with a smile of forgiving pity on Sarah Pocket's walnut-shell countenance for the weaknesses of the rest.  While Estella was away lighting them down, Miss Havisham still walked with Miss Havisham's hand on I's shoulder, but more and more slowly. At last Miss Havisham stopped before the fire, and said, after muttering and looking at the fire some seconds,—  “This is Miss Havisham's birthday, I.”  I was going to wish Miss Havisham many happy returns, when Miss Havisham lifted Miss Havisham's stick.  “Miss Havisham don’t suffer it to be spoken of. Miss Havisham don’t suffer those who wer e here just now, or any one to speak of it. They come here on the day, but They dare not refer to it.”  Of course _I_ made no further effort to refer to it.  “On the day, long before you were born, this heap of decay,” stabbing with her crutched stick at the pile of cobwebs on the table, but not touching this heap of decay, “was brought here. this heap of decay and her have worn away together. The mice have gnawed at this heap of decay, and sharper teeth than teeth of mice have gnawed at her.”  her held the head of her crutched stick against her's heart as her stood looking at the table; she in her's once white dress, all yellow and withered; her once white dress, all yellow and withered all yellow and withered; everything around in a state to crumble under a touch.  “When the ruin is complete,” said her, with a ghastly look, “and when they lay her dead, in her's bride’s dress on my bride’s table,—which shall be done, and which will be the finished curse upon him,—so much the better if it is done on the day!”  her stood looking at the table as if her stood looki ng at her own figure lying there. I remained quiet. Estella returned, and Estella too remained quiet. It seemed to I that we continued thus for a long time. In the heavy air of the room, and the heavy darkness that brooded in the room's remoter corners, I even had an alarming fancy that Estella and I might presently begin to decay.  At length, not coming out of her distraught state by degrees, but in an instant, her said, “Let her see Estella and I play cards; why have Estella and I not begun?” With that, Estella and I returned to her's room, and sat down as before; I was beggared, as before; and again, as before, her watched Estella and I all the time, directed I's attention to Estella's beauty, and made I notice Estella’s beauty the more by trying her's jewels on Estella's breast and hair.  Estella, for Estella's part, likewise treated I as before, except that Estella did not condescend to speak. When Estella and I had played some half-dozen games, a day was appointed for I's return, and I was taken down into the yard to be fed in the former dog-like  manner. There, too, I was again left to wander about as I liked.  It is not much to the purpose whether a gate in that garden wall which I had scrambled up to peep over on the last occasion was, on the last occasion, open or shut. Enough that I saw no gate then, and that I saw one now. As a gate in that garden wall which I had scrambled up to peep over on the last occasion stood open, and as I knew that Estella had let the visitors out,—for Estella had returned with the keys in Estella's hand,—I strolled into the garden, and strolled all over the garden. the garden was quite a wilderness, and there were old melon-frames and cucumber-frames in the garden, which seemed in their decline to have produced a spontaneous growth of weak attempts at pieces of old hats and boots, with now and then a weedy offshoot into the likeness of a battered saucepan.  When I had exhausted the garden and a greenhouse with nothing in a greenhouse with nothing in it but a fallen-down grape-vine and some bottles but a fallen-down grape-vine and some bottles, I found I in the dismal corner upon which I had looked out of the window. Never questioning for a moment that the house was now empty, I  looked in at another window, and found myself, to myself's great surprise, exchanging a broad stare with a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair.  a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair quickly disappeared, and reappeared beside myself. a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair had been at a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair's books when myself had found myself staring at a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair, and myself now saw that a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair was inky.  “Halloa!” said a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair, “myself!”  Halloa being a general observation which myself had usually observed to be best answered by a general observation which I had usually observed to be best answered by itself, _myself_ said, “Halloa!” politely omitting myself.  “Who let _myself_ in?” said a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair.  “Miss Estella.”  “Who gave myself leave to prowl about?”  “Miss Estella.”  “Come and fight,” said a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair.  What could myself do but follow a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair? myself have often asked myself the question since; but what else could myself do? a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair's manner was so final, and myself was so astonished, that myself followed where a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair led, as if myself had been under a spell.  “Stop a minute, though,” a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair said, wheeling round before we had gone many paces. “a pale young gentleman with red eyelids and light hair ought to give myself a reason for fight ing, too. There it is!” In a most irritating manner he instantly slapped he's hands against one another, daintily flung one of he's legs up behind he, pulled my hair, slapped his hands again, dipped he's head, and butted his head into my's stomach.  The bull-like proceeding last mentioned, besides that The bull-like proceeding last mentioned was unquestionably to be regarded in the light of a liberty, was particularly disagreeable just after bread and meat. my therefore hit out at he and was going to hit out again, when he said, “Aha! Would my?” and began dancing backwards and forwards in a manner quite unparalleled within my's limited experience.  “Laws of the game!” said he. Here, he skipped from he's left leg on to he's right. “Regular rules!” Here, he skipped from he's right leg on to he's left. “Come to the ground, and go through the preliminaries!” Here, he dodged backwards and forwards, and did all sorts of things while my looked helplessly at he.  my was secretly afraid of he when my saw he so dexterous; but my felt morally and p hysically convinced that his light head of hair could have had no business in the pit of my stomach, and that my had a right to consider his light head of hair irrelevant when so obtruded on my's attention. Therefore, my followed his without a word, to a retired nook of the garden, formed by the junction of two walls and screened by some rubbish. On his's asking my if my was satisfied with the ground, and on my's replying Yes, his begged my's leave to absent his for a moment, and quickly returned with a bottle of water and a sponge dipped in vinegar. “Available for a bottle of water and a sponge dipped in vinegar,” his said, placing a bottle of water and a sponge dipped in vinegar against the wall. And then fell to pulling off, not only his's jacket and waistcoat, but his's shirt too, in a manner at once light-hearted, business-like, and bloodthirsty.  Although his did not look very healthy,—having pimples on his's face, and a breaking out at his's mouth,—these dreadful preparations quite appalled my. my judged his to be about my's own age, but his was much taller, and his had a way of spinning his about that  was full of appearance. For the rest, he was a young gentleman in a grey suit (when not denuded for battle), with he's elbows, knees, wrists, and heels considerably in advance of the rest of he as to development.  My heart failed My when My saw he squaring at My with every demonstration of mechanical nicety, and eyeing My's anatomy as if he were minutely choosing he's bone. My never have been so surprised in My's life, as My was when My let out the first blow, and saw he lying on he's back, looking up at My with a bloody nose and he's face exceedingly fore-shortened.  But, he was on he's feet directly, and after sponging he with a great show of dexterity began squaring again. The second greatest surprise My have ever had in my life was seeing he on he's back again, looking up at My out of a black eye.  he's spirit inspired My with great respect. he seemed to have no strength, and he never once hit My hard, and he was always knocked down; but he would be up again in a moment, sponging he  or drinking out of the water-bottle, with the greatest satisfaction in seconding himself according to form, and then came at me with an air and a show that made me believe himself really was going to do for me at last. himself got heavily bruised, for me am sorry to record that the more me hit himself, the harder me hit himself; but himself came up again and again and again, until at last himself got a bad fall with the back of himself's head against the wall. Even after that crisis in our affairs, himself got up and turned round and round confusedly a few times, not knowing where me was; but finally went on himself's knees to himself's sponge and threw his sponge up: at the same time panting out, “That means me have won.”  himself seemed so brave and innocent, that although me had not proposed the contest, me felt but a gloomy satisfaction in me's victory. Indeed, me go so far as to hope that me regarded me while dressing as a species of savage young wolf or other wild beast. However, me got dressed, darkly wiping me's sanguinary face at intervals, and me  said, “Can I help you?” and you said “No thankee,” and I said “Good afternoon,” and _you_ said “Same to I.”  When I got into the courtyard, I found Estella waiting with the keys. But Estella neither asked I where I had been, nor why I had kept Estella waiting; and there was a bright flush upon Estella's face, as though something had happened to delight Estella. Instead of going straight to the gate, too, Estella stepped back into the passage, and beckoned I.  “Come here! I may kiss Estella, if I like.”  I kissed Estella's cheek as Estella turned her cheek to I. I think I would have gone through a great deal to kiss her cheek. But I felt that the kiss was given to I as a piece of money might have been, and that the kiss was worth nothing.  What with the birthday visitors, and what with the cards, and what with the fight, I's stay had lasted so long, that when I neared home the light on the spit of sand off the point on the marshes was gleaming against a black night-sky, and Joe’s furnace was flinging a path o f fire across the road.     Chapter XII.   My mind grew very uneasy on the subject of the pale young gentleman. The more My thought of the fight, and recalled the pale young gentlemanthe pale young gentleman's , the more certain it appeared that something would be done to My. My felt that the pale young gentleman's blood was on My's head, and that the Law would avenge the pale young gentleman’s blood. Without having any definite idea of the penalties My had incurred, it was clear to My that village boys could not go stalking about the country, ravaging the houses of gentlefolks and pitching into the studious youth of England, without laying village boys open to severe punishment. For some days, My even kept close at home, and looked out at the kitchen door with the greatest caution and trepidation before going on an errand, lest the officers of the County Jail should pounce upon My. the pale young gentleman's nose had stained My's trousers, and My tried to wash out that evidence of My's g uilt in the dead of night. I had cut I's knuckles against the pale young gentleman’s teeth, and I twisted I's imagination into a thousand tangles, as I devised incredible ways of accounting for that damnatory circumstance when I should be haled before the Judges.  When the day came round for I's return to the scene of the deed of violence, I's terrors reached my terrors's height. Whether myrmidons of Justice, especially sent down from London, would be lying in ambush behind the gate;—whether Miss Havisham, preferring to take personal vengeance for an outrage done to Miss Havisham's house, might rise in those grave-clothes of Miss Havisham, draw a pistol, and shoot I dead:—whether suborned boys—a numerous band of mercenaries—might be engaged to fall upon I in the brewery, and cuff I until I was no more;—it was high testimony to I's confidence in the spirit of the pale young gentleman’s, that I never imagined _the pale young gentleman’s_ accessory to these retaliations; these retaliations always came into I's mind as the acts of injudicious relatives of hi s, goaded on by the state of his visage and an indignant sympathy with the family features.  However, go to his's I must, and go I did. And behold! nothing came of the late struggle. the late struggle was not alluded to in any way, and no pale young gentleman was to be discovered on the premises. I found the same gate open, and I explored the garden, and even looked in at the windows of the detached house; but I's view was suddenly stopped by the closed shutters within, and all was lifeless. Only in the corner where the late struggle had taken place could I detect any evidence of the young gentleman’s existence. There were traces of the young gentleman’s's gore in the corner where the combat had taken place, and I covered traces of his gore with garden-mould from the eye of man.  On the broad landing between his's own room and that other room in which the long table was laid out, I saw a garden-chair,—a light chair on wheels, that you pushed from behind. a garden-chair,—a light chair on wheels, that you pushed from behind had been placed there since I's last visit, and I entered, that same day, on a regular occupation of  pushing Miss Havisham in this chair (when Miss Havisham was tired of walking with Miss Havisham's hand upon my shoulder) round Miss Havisham's own room, and across the landing, and round the other room. Over and over and over again, we would make these journeys, and sometimes these journeys would last as long as three hours at a stretch. my insensibly fall into a general mention of these journeys as numerous, because it was at once settled that my should return every alternate day at noon for these purposes, and because my am now going to sum up a period of at least eight or ten months.  As we began to be more used to one another, Miss Havisham talked more to my, and asked my such questions as what had my learnt and what was my going to be? my told Miss Havisham my was going to be apprenticed to Joe, my believed; and my enlarged upon my's knowing nothing and wanting to know everything, in the hope that Miss Havisham might offer some help towards that desirable end. But Miss Havisham did not; on the contrary, Miss Havisham seemed to prefer my's being ignorant. Neither did Miss Havisham ever  give me any money,—or anything but me's daily dinner,—nor ever stipulate that me should be paid for me's services.  Estella was always about, and always let me in and out, but never told me me might kiss Estella again. Sometimes, Estella would coldly tolerate me; sometimes, Estella would condescend to me; sometimes, Estella would be quite familiar with me; sometimes, Estella would tell me energetically that Estella hated me. Miss Havisham would often ask me in a whisper, or when we were alone, “Does Estella grow prettier and prettier, me?” And when me said yes (for indeed Miss Havisham did), would seem to enjoy it greedily. Also, when we played at cards Miss Havisham would look on, with a miserly relish of Estella's moods, whatever they were. And sometimes, when Estella's moods were so many and so contradictory of one another that me was puzzled what to say or do, Miss Havisham would embrace Estella with lavish fondness, murmuring something in Estella's ear that sounded like “Break their hearts Miss Havisham's pride and hope, break their's hearts and have no  mercy!”  There was a song Joe used to hum fragments of at the forge, of which the burden was Old Clem. This was not a very ceremonious way of rendering homage to a patron saint, but I believe Old Clem stood in that relation towards smiths. Old Clem was a song that imitated the measure of beating upon iron, and was a mere lyrical excuse for the introduction of Old Clem's respected name. Thus, you were to hammer boys round—Old Clem! With a thump and a sound—Old Clem! Beat it out, beat it out—Old Clem! With a clink for the stout—Old Clem! Blow the fire, blow the fire—Old Clem! Roaring dryer, soaring higher—Old Clem! One day soon after the appearance of the chair, Miss Havisham suddenly saying to I, with the impatient movement of Miss Havisham's fingers, “There, there, there! Sing!” I was surprised into crooning a song Joe used to hum fragments of at the forge, of which the burden was Old Clem as I pushed Miss Havisham over the floor. It happened so to catch Miss Havisham's fancy that Miss Havisham took a song Joe used to hum fragments of at the forge, of which the burden was Old Clem up in a low brooding voice as if Miss Havisham were singing in Miss Havisham's sleep. After that, it became customary with us  to have it as we moved about, and Estella would often join in; though the whole strain was so subdued, even when there were three of we, that the whole strain made less noise in the grim old house than the lightest breath of wind.  What could I become with these surroundings? How could I's character fail to be influenced by these surroundings? Is it to be wondered at if I's thoughts were dazed, as I's eyes were, when I came out into the natural light from the misty yellow rooms?  Perhaps I might have told Joe about the pale young gentleman, if I had not previously been betrayed into those enormous inventions to which I had confessed. Under the circumstances, I felt that Joe could hardly fail to discern in the pale young gentleman, an appropriate passenger to be put into the black velvet coach; therefore, I said nothing of the pale young gentleman. Besides, that shrinking from having Miss Havisham and Estella discussed, which had come upon I in the beginning, grew much more potent as time went on. I reposed complete confidence in no on e but Biddy; but I told Biddy everything. Why it came natural to I to do so, and why Biddy had a deep concern in everything I told Biddy, I did not know then, though I think I know now.  Meanwhile, councils went on in the kitchen at home, fraught with almost insupportable aggravation to I's exasperated spirit. That ass, Pumblechook, used often to come over of a night for the purpose of discussing I's prospects with I's sister; and I really do believe (to this hour with less penitence than I ought to feel), that if these hands could have taken a linchpin out of That ass, Pumblechook's chaise-cart, these hands would have done taken. That ass, Pumblechook was a man of that confined stolidity of mind, that That ass, Pumblechook could not discuss my prospects without having I before him,—as it were, to operate upon,—and That ass, Pumblechook would drag I up from I's stool (usually by the collar) where I was quiet in a corner, and, putting I before the fire as if I were going to be cooked, would begin by saying, “Now, Mum, here is I! Here is I w hich you brought up by hand. Hold up you's head, you, and be forever grateful unto them which so did do. Now, Mum, with respections to you!” And then you would rumple my hair the wrong way,—which from my's earliest remembrance, as already hinted, my have in my's soul denied the right of any fellow-creature to do,—and would hold my before you by the sleeve,—a spectacle of imbecility only to be equalled by you.  Then, you and my's sister would pair off in such nonsensical speculations about Miss Havisham, and about what Miss Havisham would do with my and for my, that my used to want—quite painfully—to burst into spiteful tears, fly at you, and pummel you all over. In these dialogues, my sister spoke to my as if my sister were morally wrenching one of my's teeth out at every reference; while youmy's , would sit supervising my with a depreciatory eye, like the architect of my's fortunes who thought the architect of my fortunes who thought himself engaged on a very unremunerative job engaged on a very unremunerative job.  In these discussions , Joe bore no part. But Joe was often talked at, while they were in progress, by reason of Mrs. Joe’s perceiving that Joe was not favourable to my being taken from the forge. my was fully old enough now to be apprenticed to Joe; and when Joe sat with the poker on Joe's knees thoughtfully raking out the ashes between the lower bars, my's sister would so distinctly construe raking into opposition on Joe's part, that my sister would dive at Joe, take the poker out of Joe's hands, shake Joe, and put the poker away. There was a most irritating end to every one of these debates. All in a moment, with nothing to lead up to it, my sister would stop my sister in a yawn, and catching sight of my as it were incidentally, would swoop upon my with, “Come! there’s enough of _my_! _my_ get along to bed; _you_’ve given trouble enough for one night, my sister hope!” As if my had besought them as a favour to bother my's life out.  We went on in this way for a long time, and it seemed likely that We should continue to go on  in this way for a long time, when one day Miss Havisham stopped short as Miss Havisham and I were walking, Miss Havisham leaning on I's shoulder; and said with some displeasure,—  “I are growing tall, I!”  I thought it best to hint, through the medium of a meditative look, that this might be occasioned by circumstances over which I had no control.  Miss Havisham said no more at the time; but Miss Havisham presently stopped and looked at I again; and presently again; and after that, looked frowning and moody. On the next day of I's attendance, when our usual exercise was over, and I had landed Miss Havisham at Miss Havisham's dressing-table, Miss Havisham stayed I with a movement of Miss Havisham's impatient fingers:—  “Tell Miss Havisham the name again of that blacksmith of I.”  “that blacksmith of yours, Miss Havisham.”  “Meaning the master I were to be apprenticed to?”  “Yes, Miss Havisham.”  “I had better be apprenticed at once. Would that blacksmith of yours come here with I, and bring I's indentures, do I think?”  I signified that I had no doubt that blacksmith of yours would take it as an honour to be asked.  “Then  let him come.”  “At any particular time, Miss Havisham?”  “There, there! Miss Havisham know nothing about times. Let him come soon, and come along with you.”  When I got home at night, and delivered this message for him, I's sister “went on the Rampage,” in a more alarming degree than at any previous period. my sister asked I and him whether me and Joe supposed my sister was door-mats under me and Joe's feet, and how me and Joe dared to use my sister so, and what company me and Joe graciously thought my sister _was_ fit for? When my sister had exhausted a torrent of such inquiries, my sister threw a candlestick at him, burst into a loud sobbing, got out the dustpan,—which was always a very bad sign,—put on my sister's coarse apron, and began cleaning up to a terrible extent. Not satisfied with a dry cleaning, my sister took to a pail and scrubbing-brush, and cleaned me and Joe out of house and home, so that me and Joe stood shivering in the back-yard. It was ten o’clock at night before me and Joe ventured to creep in again, and then my sister asked him why him hadn’t married a Negress Slave at once? him red no answer, poor fellow, but stood feeling poor fellow's whisker and looking dejectedly at me, as if poor fellow thought it really might have been a better speculation.     Chapter XIII.   It was a trial to me's feelings, on the next day but one, to see Joe arraying Joe in Joe's Sunday clothes to accompany me to Miss Havisham’s. However, as Joe thought Joe's court-suit necessary to the occasion, it was not for me to tell Joe that Joe looked far better in his Sunday clothes; the rather, because me knew Joe made Joe so dreadfully uncomfortable, entirely on me's account, and that it was for me Joe pulled up Joe's shirt-collar so very high behind, that pulled made the hair on the crown of Joe's head stand up like a tuft of feathers.  At breakfast-time me's sister declared my sister's intention of going to town with us, and being left at Uncle Pumblechook’s and called for “when we had done with we's fine ladies”—a way of putting the case, from which Joe appeared inclined to augur the worst. The forge was shut up for the day, and Joe oe inscribed in chalk upon the door (as it was oe's custom to do on the very rare occasions when oe was not at work) the monosyllable HOUT, accompanied by a sketch of an arrow supposed to be flying in the direction oe had taken.  We walked to town, my sister leading the way in a very large beaver bonnet, and carrying a basket like the Great Seal of England in plaited Straw, a pair of pattens, a spare shawl, and an umbrella, though it was a fine bright day. my am not quite clear whether a basket like the Great Seal of England in plaited Straw, a pair of pattens, a spare shawl, and an umbrella were carried penitentially or ostentatiously; but my rather think a basket like the Great Seal of England in plaited Straw, a pair of pattens, a spare shawl, and an umbrella were displayed as articles of property,—much as Cleopatra or any other sovereign lady on the Rampage might exhibit Cleopatra or any other sovereign lady on the Rampage's wealth in a pageant or procession.  When We came to Pumblechook’s, my sister bounced in and left We. As it was almost noon, Joe and my held straight on to Miss Havisham’s house. Estella opened the gate as usual, and, the moment Estella appeared, Joe took Joe's hat off and stood weighing his hat by the brim in both his  hands; as if he had some urgent reason in he's mind for being particular to half a quarter of an ounce.  Estella took no notice of either of us, but led us the way that I knew so well. I followed next to Estella, and he came last. When I looked back at he in the long passage, he was still weighing he's hat with the greatest care, and was coming after us in long strides on the tips of he's toes.  Estella told I us were both to go in, so I took he by the coat-cuff and conducted he into Miss Havisham’s presence. Miss Havisham’s was seated at Miss Havisham’s's dressing-table, and looked round at us immediately.  “Oh!” said Miss Havisham’s to he. “he are the husband of the sister of this boy?”  I could hardly have imagined he looking so unlike he or so like some extraordinary bird; standing as he did speechless, with he's tuft of feathers ruffled, and he's mouth open as if he wanted a worm.  “he are the husband,” repeated Miss Havisham’s, “of the sister of this boythis boy?”  It was very aggravating; but, throughout the in terview, Joe persisted in addressing Me instead of Miss Havisham.  “Which Joe meantersay, Me,” Joe now observed in a manner that was at once expressive of forcible argumentation, strict confidence, and great politeness, “as Joe hup and married Me's sister, and Joe were at the time what Me might call (if Me was anyways inclined) a single man.”  “Well!” said Miss Havisham. “And Joe have reared the boy, with the intention of taking the boy for Joe's apprentice; is that so, Joe?”  “Me know, Me,” replied Joe, “as Me and Joe were ever friends, and it were looked for’ard to betwixt you and me, as being calc’lated to lead to larks. Not but what, Me, if Me had ever made objections to the business,—such as its being open to black and sut, or such-like,—not but what they would have been attended to, don’t Me see?”  “Has the boy,” said Miss Havisham, “ever made any objection? Does the boy like the trade?”  “Which it is well beknown to Me, Me,” returned Joe, strengthening Joe's former mixture of argum entation, confidence, and politeness, “that it were the wish of your own hart.” (I saw the idea suddenly break upon him that him would adapt him's epitaph to the occasion, before him went on to say) “And there weren’t no objection on your's part, and I it were the great wish of your own hart!”  It was quite in vain for I to endeavour to make him sensible that him ought to speak to Miss Havisham. The more I made faces and gestures to him to do speak, the more confidential, argumentative, and polite, him persisted in being to I.  “Have him brought him's indentures with him?” asked Miss Havisham.  “Well, I, I know,” replied him, as if brought were a little unreasonable, “you I see him put his indentures in him's ’at, and therefore I know as his indentures are here.” With which him took his indentures out, and gave his indentures, not to Miss Havisham, but to I. I am afraid I was ashamed of the dear good fellow,—I _know_ I was ashamed of him,—when I saw that Estella stood at the back of Miss Havisham's chair, and that Estella's eyes laughed m ischievously. I took the indentures out of his hand and gave the indentures to Miss Havisham.  “I expected,” said Miss Havisham, as Miss Havisham looked the indentures over, “no premium with his?”  “his!” I remonstrated, for his made no reply at all. “Why don’t his answer—”  “I,” returned his, cutting I short as if his were hurt, “which his meantersay that were not a question requiring a answer betwixt I and his, and which I know the answer to be full well No. I know the answer to be No, I, and wherefore should his say the answer?”  Miss Havisham glanced at his as if Miss Havisham understood what his really was better than I had thought possible, seeing what his was there; and took up a little bag from the table beside Miss Havisham.  “I has earned a premium here,” Miss Havisham said, “and here a premium is. There are five-and-twenty guineas in a little bag. Give a little bag to I's master, I.”  As if his were absolutely out of his's mind with the wonder awakened in his by Miss Havisham's strange figure and the strange room, his, even at this pass, persisted in addressing I.   “This is wery liberal on your part, your,” said Joe, “and This is as such received and grateful welcome, though never looked for, far nor near, nor nowheres. And now, old chap,” said Joe, conveying to your a sensation, first of burning and then of freezing, for your felt as if that familiar expression were applied to Miss Havisham,—“and now, old chap, may we do we's duty! May we do we's duty, both on we, by one and another, and by them which Joe's liberal present—have-conweyed—to be—for the satisfaction of mind-of—your liberal present as never—” here Joe showed that Joe felt Joe had fallen into frightful difficulties, until Joe triumphantly rescued Joe with the words, “and from Joe far be it!” These words had such a round and convincing sound for Joe that Joe said These words twice.  “Good-bye, your!” said Miss Havisham,—“and. “Let we out, Estella.”  “Am your to come again, Miss Havisham,—“and?” your asked.  “No. Gargery is your's master now. Gargery One word!”  Thus calling Joe back as your went out of the door, your heard Miss Havisham,—“and say  to Joe in a distinct emphatic voice, “Joe has been a good boy here, and been is Joe's reward. Of course, as an honest man, Joe will expect no other and no more.”  How Joe got out of the room, I have never been able to determine; but I know that when Joe did get out Joe was steadily proceeding upstairs instead of coming down, and was deaf to all remonstrances until I went after Joe and laid hold of Joe. In another minute we were outside the gate, and the gate was locked, and Estella was gone. When we stood in the daylight alone again, Joe backed up against a wall, and said to I, “Astonishing!” And there Joe remained so long saying, “Astonishing” at intervals, so often, that I began to think Joe's senses were never coming back. At length Joe prolonged Joe's remark into “I, Joe do assure _I_ this is as-TON-ishing!” and so, by degrees, became conversational and able to walk away.  I have reason to think that Joe's intellects were brightened by the encounter Joe’s intellects had passed through, and that on our  way to Pumblechook’s Pumblechook’s invented a subtle and deep design. My reason is to be found in what took place in Pumblechook’s's parlour: where, on our presenting our, My's sister sat in conference with that detested seedsman.  “Well?” cried my sister, addressing us both at once. “And what’s happened to _us both_? my sister wonder us both condescend to come back to such poor society as this, my sister am sure my sister do!”  “Miss Havisham,” said us both, with a fixed look at My, like an effort of remembrance, “made it wery partick’ler that our should give Miss Havisham—were it compliments or respects, My?”  “Compliments,” My said.  “Which that were us both's own belief,” answered us both; “Miss Havisham's compliments to Mrs. J. Gargery—”  “Much good her compliments to Mrs. J. Gargery’ll do my sister!” observed my sister; but rather gratified too.  “And wishing,” pursued us both, with another fixed look at My, like another effort of remembrance, “that the state of Miss Havisham's elth were sitch as would have—allowed, were it, My?”  “Of Miss Havisham having the pleasure,” My added.  “Of ladies’ company,”  said Joe. And drew a long breath.  “Well!” cried my sister, with a mollified glance at Mr. Pumblechook. “She might have had the politeness to send that message at first, but it’s better late than never. And what did She give young Rantipole here?”  “She giv’ him,” said Joe, “nothing.”  my sister was going to break out, but Joe went on.  “What She giv’,” said Joe, “She giv’ to him's friends. ‘And by his friends,’ were She's explanation, ‘She mean into the hands of him's sister Mrs. J. Gargery.’ Them were She's words; ‘his sister Mrs. J. Gargery.’ She mayn’t have know’d,” added Joe, with an appearance of reflection, “whether it were Joe, or Jorge.”  my's looked at Pumblechook: who smoothed the elbows of Mr. Pumblechook's wooden arm-chair, and nodded at my sister and at the fire, as if Mr. Pumblechook had known all about it beforehand.  “And how much have you got?” asked my's , laughing. Positively laughing!  “What would present company say to ten pound?” demanded Joe.  “present company’d say,” returned my's , curtly, “pretty well. Not too  much, but pretty well.”  “It’s more than It, then,” said Joe.  That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook, immediately nodded, and said, as That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook rubbed the arms of That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook's chair, “It’s more than It, Mum.”  “Why, That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook don’t mean to say—” began my sister.  “Yes That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook do, Mum,” said That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook; “but wait a bit. Go on, Joe. Good in Joe! Go on!”  “What would present company say,” proceeded Joe, “to twenty pound?”  “Handsome would be the word,” returned my sister.  “Well, then,” said Joe, “It’s more than twenty pound.”  That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook, nodded again, and said, with a patronizing laugh, “It’s more than that, Mum. Good again! Follow my sister up, Joe!”  “Then to make an end of it,” said Joe, delightedly handing the bag to my sister; “It’s five-and-twenty pound.”  “It’s five-and-twenty pound, Mum,” echoed That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook, rising to shake hands with my sister; “and it’s no more than my sister's merits (as That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook said when That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook's opinion was asked), and That fearful Impostor, Pumblechook wish Mum joy of the money!”  If the  villain had stopped here,  villain's case would have been sufficiently awful, but  villain blackened  villain's guilt by proceeding to take me into custody, with a right of patronage that left all  villain's former criminality far behind.  “Now you see, you,” said  villain, as  villain took me by the arm above the elbow, “ villain am one of them that always go right through with what them that always go right through with what they’ve begun’ve begun. me must be bound, out of hand. bound’s _ villain's_ way. Bound out of hand.”  “Goodness knows,  villain,” said me's sister (grasping the money), “you’re deeply beholden to  villain.”  “Never mind  villain, my sister,” returned  villain. “A pleasure’s a pleasure all the world over. But me, you know; we must have me bound.  villain said  villain’d see to bound—to tell you the truth.”  The Justices were sitting in the Town Hall near at hand, and we at once went over to have me bound me in the Magisterial presence. me say we went over, but me was pushed over by  villain, exactly as if me had that moment pick ed a pocket or fired a rick; indeed, it was the general impression in Court that I had been taken red-handed; for, as Pumblechook shoved I before Pumblechook through the crowd, I heard some people say, “What’s Pumblechook done?” and others, “Pumblechook’s a young ’un, too, but looks bad, don’t Pumblechook?” One person of mild and benevolent aspect even gave I a tract ornamented with a woodcut of a malevolent young man fitted up with a perfect sausage-shop of fetters, and entitled TO BE READ IN I CELL.  The Hall was a queer place, I thought, with higher pews in The Hall than a church,—and with people hanging over the pews looking on,—and with mighty Justices (one with a powdered head) leaning back in chairs, with folded arms, or taking snuff, or going to sleep, or writing, or reading the newspapers,—and with some shining black portraits on the walls, which I's unartistic eye regarded as a composition of hardbake and sticking-plaster. Here, in a corner I's indentures were duly signed and attested, and I was “bound”; Pumblechook chook holding me all the while as if we had looked in on we's way to the scaffold, to have those little preliminaries disposed of.  When we had come out again, and had got rid of the boys who had been put into great spirits by the expectation of seeing me publicly tortured, and who were much disappointed to find that me's friends were merely rallying round me, we went back to Pumblechook’s. And there me's sister became so excited by the twenty-five guineas, that nothing would serve my sister but we must have a dinner out of that windfall at the Blue Boar, and that Pumblechook’s must go over in Pumblechook’s's chaise-cart, and bring the Hubbles and Mr. Wopsle.  It was agreed to be done; and a most melancholy day me passed. For, it inscrutably appeared to stand to reason, in the minds of the whole company, that me was an excrescence on the entertainment. And to make it worse, the whole company asked me from time to time,—in short, whenever the whole company had nothing else to do,—why me didn’t enjoy me? And what could me possibly do  then, but say I _was_ enjoying myself,—when I wasn’t!  However, they were grown up and had they's own way, and they made the most of it. That swindling Pumblechook, exalted into the beneficent contriver of the whole occasion, actually took the top of the table; and, when That swindling Pumblechook, exalted into the beneficent contriver of the whole occasion addressed they on the subject of I's being bound, and had fiendishly congratulated they on I's being liable to imprisonment if I played at cards, drank strong liquors, kept late hours or bad company, or indulged in other vagaries which the form of I's indentures appeared to contemplate as next to inevitable, That swindling Pumblechook, exalted into the beneficent contriver of the whole occasion placed I standing on a chair beside That swindling Pumblechook, exalted into the beneficent contriver of the whole occasion to illustrate That swindling Pumblechook, exalted into the beneficent contriver of the whole occasion's remarks.  I's only other remembrances of the great festival are, That they wouldn’t let I go to sleep, but whenever they saw I dropping off, woke I up and told I to enjoy I. That, rather late in the evening Mr. Wopsle gave us Collins’s ode, and threw Mr. Wopsle's bloodstained sword in thunder down, with such effect, that a waiter came in and said, “The Co mmercials underneath sent up their compliments, and it wasn’t the Tumblers’ Arms.” That, the Tumblers’ were all in excellent spirits on the road home, and sang, O Lady Fair! Mr. Wopsle taking the bass, and asserting with a tremendously strong voice (in reply to the inquisitive bore who leads that piece of music in a most impertinent manner, by wanting to know all about everybody’s private affairs) that _the inquisitive bore who leads that piece of music in a most impertinent manner, by wanting to know all about everybody’s private affairs_ was the man with the inquisitive bore who leads that piece of music in a most impertinent manner, by wanting to know all about everybody’s private affairs's white locks flowing, and that the inquisitive bore who leads that piece of music in a most impertinent manner, by wanting to know all about everybody’s private affairs was upon the whole the weakest pilgrim going.  Finally, I remember that when I got into I's little bedroom, I was truly wretched, and had a strong conviction on I that I should never like Joe’s trade. I had liked Joe’s trade once, but once was not now.     Chapter XIV.   It is a most miserable thing to feel ashamed of home. There may be black ingratitude in feel, and the punishment may be retributive and well deserved; but that feel is a miserable thing, I can testify.  Home had never been a very pleasant place to I, because of I's sister’s tem per. But, Joe had sanctified it, and I had believed in it. I had believed in the best parlour as a most elegant saloon; I had believed in the front door, as a mysterious portal of the Temple of State whose solemn opening was attended with a sacrifice of roast fowls; I had believed in the kitchen as a chaste though not magnificent apartment; I had believed in the forge as the glowing road to manhood and independence. Within a single year all this was changed. Now it was all coarse and common, and I would not have had Miss Havisham and Estella see it on any account.  How much of I's ungracious condition of mind may have been I's own fault, how much Miss Havisham's, how much I's sister’s, is now of no moment to I or to any one. The change was made in I; The change was done. Well or ill done, excusably or inexcusably, The change was done.  Once, it had seemed to I that when I should at last roll up I's shirt-sleeves and go into the forge, Joeprentice, I should be distinguished and happy. Now the  reality was in my hold, my only felt that my was dusty with the dust of small-coal, and that my had a weight upon my's daily remembrance to which the anvil was a feather. There have been occasions in my's later life (my suppose as in most lives) when my have felt for a time as if a thick curtain had fallen on all a thick curtain's interest and romance, to shut my out from anything save dull endurance any more. Never has a thick curtain dropped so heavy and blank, as when my's way in life lay stretched out straight before my through the newly entered road of apprenticeship to Joe.  my remember that at a later period of my's “time,” my used to stand about the churchyard on Sunday evenings when night was falling, comparing my's own perspective with the windy marsh view, and making out some likeness between them by thinking how flat and low them were, and how on them there came an unknown way and a dark mist and then the sea. my was quite as dejected on the first working-day of my's apprenticeship as in that after-time; but  I am glad to know that I never breathed a murmur to Joe while I's indentures lasted. It is about the only thing I _am_ glad to know of I in that connection.  For, though It includes what I proceed to add, all the merit of what I proceed to add was Joe's. It was not because I was faithful, but because Joe was faithful, that I never ran away and went for a soldier or a sailor. It was not because I had a strong sense of the virtue of industry, but because Joe had a strong sense of the virtue of industry, that I worked with tolerable zeal against the grain. It is not possible to know how far the influence of any amiable honest-hearted duty-doing man flies out into the world; but it is very possible to know how the influence of any amiable honest-hearted duty-doing man has touched one’s self in going by, and I know right well that any good that intermixed itself with I's apprenticeship came of Joe, and not of I.  What I wanted, who can say? How can _I_ say, when I never knew? What I dreaded wa s, that in some unlucky hour I, being at I's grimiest and commonest, should lift up I's eyes and see Estella looking in at one of the wooden windows of the forge. I was haunted by the fear that Estella would, sooner or later, find I out, with a black face and hands, doing the coarsest part of I's work, and would exult over I and despise I. Often after dark, when I was pulling the bellows for Joe, and we were singing Old Clem, and when the thought how we used to sing Old Clem at Miss Havisham’s would seem to show I Estella's face in the fire, with Estella's pretty hair fluttering in the wind and Estella's eyes scorning me,—often at such a time I would look towards those panels of black night in the wall which the wooden windows then were, and would fancy that I saw Estella just drawing Estella away, and would believe that Estella had come at last.  After that, when we went in to supper, the place and supper would have a more homely look than ever, and I would feel more ashamed of home than ever, in I's own ungrac ious breast.     Chapter XV.   As I was getting too big for Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s room, I's education under Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s terminated. Not, however, until Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s had imparted to I everything Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s knew, from the little catalogue of prices, to a comic song Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s had once bought for a half-penny. Although the only coherent part of a comic song she had once bought for a half-penny were the opening lines,       When I went to Lunnon town sirs,      Too rul loo rul      Too rul loo rul      Wasn’t I done very brown sirs?      Too rul loo rul      Too rul loo rul   —still, in I's desire to be wiser, I got a comic song she had once bought for a half-penny by heart with the utmost gravity; nor do I recollect that I questioned a comic song she had once bought for a half-penny's merit, except that I thought (as I still do) the amount of Too rul somewhat in excess of the poetry. In I's hunger for information, I made proposals to Mr. Wopsle’s to bestow some intellectual crumbs upon I, with which Mr. Wopsle’s kindly complied. As it turned out, however, that Mr. Wopsle’s only wanted I for a dramatic lay-figure , to be contradicted and embraced and wept over and bullied and clutched and stabbed and knocked about in a variety of ways, I soon declined that course of instruction; though not until Mr. Wopsle in Mr. Wopsle's poetic fury had severely mauled I.  Whatever I acquired, I tried to impart to Joe. This statement sounds so well, that I cannot in I's conscience let This statement pass unexplained. I wanted to make Joe less ignorant and common, that Joe might be worthier of I's society and less open to Estella’s reproach.  The old Battery out on the marshes was our place of study, and a broken slate and a short piece of slate-pencil were our's educational implements: to which Joe always added a pipe of tobacco. I never knew Joe to remember anything from one Sunday to another, or to acquire, under I's tuition, any piece of information whatever. Yet Joe would smoke Joe's pipe at The old Battery out on the marshes with a far more sagacious air than anywhere else,—even with a learned air,—as if Joe considered Joe to be advancing immensely. I r fellow, I hope he did.  It was pleasant and quiet, out there with the sails on the river passing beyond the earthwork, and sometimes, when the tide was low, looking as if the sails on the river belonged to sunken ships that were still sailing on at the bottom of the water. Whenever I watched the vessels standing out to sea with the vessels's white sails spread, I somehow thought of Miss Havisham and Estella; and whenever the light struck aslant, afar off, upon a cloud or sail or green hillside or water-line, it was just the same.—Miss Havisham and Estella and the strange house and the strange life appeared to have something to do with everything that was picturesque.  One Sunday when Joe, greatly enjoying Joe's pipe, had so plumed Joe on being “most awful dull,” that I had given Joe up for the day, I lay on the earthwork for some time with I's chin on I's hand, descrying traces of Miss Havisham and Estella all over the prospect, in the sky and in the water, until at last I resolved to mention a thought concer ning them that had been much in my head.  “Joe,” said my; “don’t Joe think my ought to make Miss Havisham a visit?”  “Well, my,” returned Joe, slowly considering. “What for?”  “What for, Joe? What is any visit made for?”  “There is some wisits p’r’aps,” said Joe, “as for ever remains open to the question, my. But in regard to wisiting Miss Havisham. Miss Havisham might think my wanted something,—expected something of Miss Havisham.”  “Don’t Joe think my might say that my did not, Joe?”  “my might, my,” said Joe. “And Miss Havisham might credit it. Similarly Miss Havisham mightn’t.”  Joe felt, as my did, that Joe had made a point there, and Joe pulled hard at Joe's pipe to keep Joe from weakening his pipe by repetition.  “my see, my,” Joe pursued, as soon as Joe was past that danger, “Miss Havisham done the handsome thing by my. When Miss Havisham done the handsome thing by my, Miss Havisham called Joe back to say to Joe as that were all.”  “Yes, Joe. my heard Miss Havisham.”  “ALL,” Joe repeated, very emphatically.  “Yes, Joe. my tell Joe, my hear d her.”  “Which I meantersay, Pip, it might be that her's meaning were,—Make a end on it!—As Pip was!—Me to the North, and Pip to the South!—Keep in sunders!”  Pip had thought of that too, and it was very far from comforting to Pip to find that I had thought of that; for it seemed to render that more probable.  “But, I.”  “Yes, Pip.”  “Here am Pip, getting on in the first year of Pip's time, and, since the day of Pip's being bound, Pip have never thanked her, or asked after her, or shown that Pip remember her.”  “That’s true, Pip; and unless Pip was to turn her out a set of shoes all four round,—and which I meantersay as even a set of shoes all four round might not be acceptable as a present, in a total wacancy of hoofs—”  “Pip don’t mean that sort of remembrance, I; Pip don’t mean a present.”  But I had got the idea of a present in I's head and must harp upon the idea of a present. “Or even,” said I, “if Pip was helped to knocking her up a new chain for the front door,—or say a gross or two of shark-heade d screws for general use,—or some light fancy article, such as a toasting-fork when she took she's muffins,—or a gridiron when she took a sprat or such like—”  “I don’t mean any present at all, Joe,” I interposed.  “Well,” said Joe, still harping on it as though I had particularly pressed it, “if Joe was I, I, Joe wouldn’t. No, Joe would _not_. For what’s a door-chain when she’s got one always up? And shark-headers is open to misrepresentations. And if it was a toasting-fork, you’d go into brass and do yourself no credit. And the oncommonest workman can’t show the oncommonest workman oncommon in a gridiron,—for a gridiron IS a gridiron,” said Joe, steadfastly impressing it upon I, as if Joe were endeavouring to rouse I from a fixed delusion, “and I may haim at what I like, but a gridiron it will come out, either by I's leave or again your leave, and you can’t help yourself—”  “Joe,” I cried, in desperation, taking hold of Joe's coat, “don’t go on in that way. I never thought of making Mis s Havisham any present.”  “No, Pip,” Joe assented, as if Joe had been contending for that, all along; “and what Joe say to Pip is, Pip are right, Pip.”  “Yes, Joe; but what “ wanted to say, was, that as we are rather slack just now, if Joe would give “ a half-holiday to-morrow, “ think “ would go uptown and make a call on Miss Est—Havisham.”  “Which Miss Est—Havisham's name,” said Joe, gravely, “ain’t Estavisham, Pip, unless Miss Est—Havisham have been rechris’ened.”  ““ know, Joe, “ know. It was a slip of “. What do Joe think of It, Joe?”  In brief, Joe thought that if “ thought well of It, Joe thought well of It. But, Joe was particular in stipulating that if “ were not received with cordiality, or if “ were not encouraged to repeat “'s visit as a visit which had no ulterior object but was simply one of gratitude for a favour received, then this experimental trip should have no successor. By these conditions “ promised to abide.  Now, Joe kept a journeyman at weekly wages whose name was Orlick. Joe pretended that hi s Christian name was Dolge,—a clear Impossibility,—but he was a fellow of that obstinate disposition that I believe he to have been the prey of no delusion in this particular, but wilfully to have imposed s Christian name upon the village as an affront to the village's understanding. he was a broadshouldered loose-limbed swarthy fellow of great strength, never in a hurry, and always slouching. he never even seemed to come to he's work on purpose, but would slouch in as if by mere accident; and when he went to the Jolly Bargemen to eat he's dinner, or went away at night, he would slouch out, like Cain or the Wandering Jew, as if he had no idea where he was going and no intention of ever coming back. he lodged at a sluice-keeper’s out on the marshes, and on working-days would come slouching from he's hermitage, with he's hands in he's pockets and he's dinner loosely tied in a bundle round he's neck and dangling on he's back. On Sundays he mostly lay all day on the sluice-gates, or stood against ricks and barns.  He always slouched, locomotively, with He's eyes on the ground; and, when accosted or otherwise required to raise his eyes, He looked up in a half-resentful, half-puzzled way, as though the only thought He ever had was, that it was rather an odd and injurious fact that He should never be thinking.  He had no liking for me. When me was very small and timid, He gave me to understand that the Devil lived in a black corner of the forge, and that He knew the Devil very well: also that it was necessary to make up the fire, once in seven years, with a live boy, and that me might consider me fuel. When me became Joe’s ’prentice, He was perhaps confirmed in some suspicion that me should displace He; howbeit, He liked me still less. Not that He ever said anything, or did anything, openly importing hostility; me only noticed that He always beat He's sparks in me's direction, and that whenever me sang Old Clem, He came in out of time.  He was at work and present, next day , when I reminded Joe of I's half-holiday. Joe said nothing at the moment, for Joe and Joe had just got a piece of hot iron between he and Joe, and I was at the bellows; but by and by Joe said, leaning on Joe's hammer,—  “Now, master! Sure master’re not a-going to favour only one of us. If Young Pip has a half-holiday, do as much for Old Orlick.” I suppose Old Orlick was about five-and-twenty, but Old Orlick usually spoke of Old Orlick as an ancient person.  “Why, what’ll Old Orlick do with a half-holiday, if Old Orlick get a half-holiday?” said Joe.  “What’ll _Old Orlick_ do with a half-holiday! What’ll _Old Orlick_ do with a half-holiday? Old Orlick’ll do as much with a half-holiday as _Old Orlick_,” said Old Orlick.  “As to Young Pip, Young Pip’s going up town,” said Joe.  “Well then, as to Old Orlick, _Old Orlick_’s a-going up town,” retorted Old Orlick. “Two can go up town. Tain’t only one wot can go up town.  “Don’t lose Old Orlick's temper,” said Joe.  “Shall if Old Orlick like,” growled Old Orlick. “Some and Some's uptowning! Now, master! Come. No favouring in this shop. Be a man!”  master refusing to entertain the subject until the journeyman w as in a better temper, Orlick plunged at the furnace, drew out a red-hot bar, made at me with a red-hot bar as if Orlick were going to run a red-hot bar through me's body, whisked a red-hot bar round me's head, laid a red-hot bar on the anvil, hammered a red-hot bar out,—as if it were me, me thought, and the sparks were me's spirting blood,—and finally said, when Orlick had hammered Orlick hot and the iron cold, and Orlick again leaned on Orlick's hammer,—  “Now, Orlick!”  “Are Orlick all right now?” demanded Joe.  “Ah! Orlick am all right,” said Orlick.  “Then, as in general Orlick stick to Orlick's work as well as most men,” said Joe, “let it be a half-holiday for all.”  me's sister had been standing silent in the yard, within hearing,—she was a most unscrupulous spy and listener,—and My sister instantly looked in at one of the windows.  “Like Joe, Joe!” said My sister to Joe, “giving holidays to great idle hulkers like that. Joe are a rich man, upon My sister's life, to waste wages in that way. My sister wish _My sister_ was Orlick's master!”  “My sister’d be everybody’s master, if My sister durst,” retorted Orlick , with an ill-favoured grin.  (“Let her alone,” said Joe.)  “her’d be a match for all noodles and all rogues,” returned her, beginning to work her into a mighty rage. “And her couldn’t be a match for all noodles, without being a match for your master, who’s the dunder-headed king of all noodles. And her couldn’t be a match for all rogues, without being a match for you, who are the blackest-looking and the worst rogue between this and France. Now!”  “her’re a foul shrew, her,” growled the journeyman. “If that makes a judge of rogues, her ought to be a good’un.”  (“Let her alone, will my?” said Joe.)  “What did Joe say?” cried my's , beginning to scream. “What did Joe say? What did that fellow Orlick say to her, Pip? What did that fellow Orlick call her, with Joe standing by? Oh! oh! oh!” Each of these exclamations was a shriek; and my must remark of my's , what is equally true of all the violent women my have ever seen, that passion was no excuse for her, because passion is undeni able that instead of lapsing into passion, she consciously and deliberately took extraordinary pains to force she into passion, and became blindly furious by regular stages; “what was the name he gave she before he? Oh! Hold she! Oh!”  “Ah-h-h!” growled he, between he's teeth, “he’d hold she, if she was he's wife. he’d hold she under the pump, and choke it out of she.”  (“I tell you, let she alone,” said I.)  “Oh! To hear he!” cried I's , with a clap of she's hands and a scream together,—which was she's next stage. “To hear the names he’s giving she! That Orlick! In she's own house! Me, a married woman! With I standing by! Oh! Oh!” Here I's , after a fit of clappings and screamings, beat her hands upon she's bosom and upon she's knees, and threw she's cap off, and pulled she's hair down,—which were the last stages on she's road to frenzy. Being by this time a perfect Fury and a complete success, she made a dash at the door which I had fortunatel y locked.  What could the wretched Joe do now, after the wretched Joe's disregarded parenthetical interruptions, but stand up to the wretched Joe's journeyman, and ask his journeyman what his journeyman meant by interfering betwixt the wretched Joe and Mrs. Joe; and further whether the wretched Joe was man enough to come on? his journeyman felt that the situation admitted of nothing less than coming on, and was on his journeyman's defence straightway; so, without so much as pulling off himself and Mrs. Joe's singed and burnt aprons, himself and Mrs. Joe went at himself and Mrs. Joe, like two giants. But, if any man in that neighbourhood could stand uplong against the wretched Joe, I never saw any man in that neighbourhood. his journeyman, as if his journeyman had been of no more account than the wretched Joe, was very soon among the coal-dust, and in no hurry to come out of the coal-dust. Then the wretched Joe unlocked the door and picked up I's sister, who had dropped insensible at the window (but who had seen the fight first, I think), and who was carried into the house and laid down, and who was recommended to revive, and would do nothing but struggle and clench her hands in the wretched Joe's hair . Then came that singular calm and silence which succeed all uproars; and then, with the vague sensation which I have always connected with such a lull,—namely, that it was Sunday, and somebody was dead,—I went upstairs to dress I.  [Illustration]  When I came down again, I found Joe and Orlick sweeping up, without any other traces of discomposure than a slit in one of Orlick's nostrils, which was neither expressive nor ornamental. A pot of beer had appeared from the Jolly Bargemen, and Joe and Orlick were sharing A pot of beer by turns in a peaceable manner. The lull had a sedative and philosophical influence on Joe, who followed I out into the road to say, as a parting observation that might do I good, “On the Rampage, I, and off the Rampage, Pip:—such is Life!”  With what absurd emotions (for we think the feelings that are very serious in a man quite comical in a boy) I found I again going to Miss Havisham’s, matters little here. Nor, how I passed and repassed the gate many times before I  could make up my mind to ring. Nor, how my debated whether my should go away without ringing; nor, how my should undoubtedly have gone, if my's time had been my's own, to come back.  Miss Sarah Pocket came to the gate. No Estella.  “How, then? my here again?” said Miss Sarah Pocket. “What do my want?”  When my said that my only came to see how Miss Havisham was, Miss Sarah Pocket evidently deliberated whether or no Miss Sarah Pocket should send my about my's business. But unwilling to hazard the responsibility, Miss Sarah Pocket let my in, and presently brought the sharp message that my was to “come up.”  Everything was unchanged, and Miss Havisham was alone.  “Well?” said Miss Havisham, fixing Miss Havisham's eyes upon my. “Miss Havisham hope my want nothing? my’ll get nothing.”  “No indeed, Miss Havisham. my only wanted Miss Havisham to know that my am doing very well in my's apprenticeship, and am always much obliged to Miss Havisham.”  “There, there!” with the old restless fingers. “Come now and then; come on Miss Havisham's birthday.—Ay!” Miss Havisham cried suddenly, turning Miss Havisham and Miss Havisham's chair towards my, “ You are looking round for Estella? Hey?”  You had been looking round,—in fact, for Estella,—and You stammered that You hoped Estella was well.  “Abroad,” said Miss Havisham; “educating for a lady; far out of reach; prettier than ever; admired by all who see Estella. Do You feel that You have lost Estella?”  There was such a malignant enjoyment in Miss Havisham's utterance of the last words, and Miss Havisham broke into such a disagreeable laugh, that You was at a loss what to say. Miss Havisham spared You the trouble of considering, by dismissing You. When the gate was closed upon You by Sarah of the walnut-shell countenance, You felt more than ever dissatisfied with You's home and with You's trade and with everything; and that was all You took by _that_ motion.  As You was loitering along the High Street, looking in disconsolately at the shop windows, and thinking what You would buy if You were a gentleman, who should come out of the bookshop but Mr. Wopsle. Mr. Wopsle had in Mr. Wopsle's hand the affecting tragedy of George Barnwell, in which Mr. Wopsle had that moment  invested sixpence, with the view of heaping every word of it on the head of Pumblechook, with whom Pumblechook, with whom he was going to drink tea was going to drink tea. No sooner did Pumblechook, with whom he was going to drink tea see me, than Pumblechook, with whom he was going to drink tea appeared to consider that a special Providence had put a ’prentice in Pumblechook, with whom he was going to drink tea's way to be read at; and Pumblechook, with whom he was going to drink tea laid hold of me, and insisted on me's accompanying Pumblechook, with whom he was going to drink tea to the Pumblechookian parlour. As me knew it would be miserable at home, and as the nights were dark and the way was dreary, and almost any companionship on the road was better than none, me made no great resistance; consequently, we turned into Pumblechook, with whom he was going to drink tea's just as the street and the shops were lighting up.  As me never assisted at any other representation of George Barnwell, me don’t know how long it may usually take; but me know very well that it took until half-past nine o’ clock that night, and that when Mr. Wopsle got into Newgate, me thought Mr. Wopsle never would go to the scaffold, Mr. Wopsle became so much slower than at any former period of Mr. Wopsle's disgraceful career. me thought became a little too  much that he should complain of being cut short in he's flower after all, as if he had not been running to seed, leaf after leaf, ever since he's course began. This, however, was a mere question of length and wearisomeness. What stung me, was the identification of the whole affair with me's unoffending self. When Barnwell began to go wrong, me declare that me felt positively apologetic, Pumblechook’s indignant stare so taxed me with it. Wopsle, too, took pains to present me in the worst light. At once ferocious and maudlin, me was made to murder me's uncle with no extenuating circumstances whatever; Millwood put me down in argument, on every occasion; it became sheer monomania in me's master’s daughter to care a button for me; and all me can say for me's gasping and procrastinating conduct on the fatal morning, is, that my gasping and procrastinating conduct on the fatal morning was worthy of the general feebleness of me's character. Even after me was happily hanged and Wopsle had closed the book, Pumblechook’s sat staring at me, and shaking Pumblechook’s's head, and say ing, “Take warning, boy, take warning!” as if it were a well-known fact that I contemplated murdering a near relation, provided I could only induce one to have the weakness to become I's benefactor.  It was a very dark night when it was all over, and when I set out with Mr. Wopsle on the walk home. Beyond town, we found a heavy mist out, and a heavy mist fell wet and thick. The turnpike lamp was a blur, quite out of The turnpike lamp's usual place apparently, and The turnpike lamp's rays looked solid substance on a heavy mist. we were noticing this, and saying how that a heavy mist rose with a change of wind from a certain quarter of our marshes, when we came upon a man, slouching under the lee of the turnpike house.  “Halloa!” we said, stopping. “Orlick there?”  “Ah!” Orlick answered, slouching out. “Orlick was standing by a minute, on the chance of company.”  “Orlick are late,” I remarked.  Orlick not unnaturally answered, “Well? And _you_’re late.”  “We have been,” said Mr. Wopsle, exalted with Mr. Wopsle's late performance,—“we have been indulgin g, Mr. Orlick, in an intellectual evening.”  Mr. Orlick growled, as if Mr. Orlick had nothing to say about that, and we all went on together. I asked Mr. Orlick presently whether Mr. Orlick had been spending Mr. Orlick's half-holiday up and down town?  “Yes,” said Mr. Orlick, “his half-holiday. Mr. Orlick come in behind I. Mr. Orlick didn’t see I, but Mr. Orlick must have been pretty close behind I. By the by, the guns is going again.”  “At the Hulks?” said I  Mr. OrlickAy! There’s some of the birds flown from the cages. the guns have been going since dark, about. I’ll hear one presently.”  In effect, we all had not walked many yards further, when the well-remembered boom came towards we all, deadened by the mist, and heavily rolled away along the low grounds by the river, as if the well-remembered boom were pursuing and threatening the fugitives.  “A good night for cutting off in,” said Mr. Orlick. “We’d be puzzled how to bring down a jail-bird on the wing, to-night.”  The subject was a suggestive one to I, and I thought about The subject in silence. Mr. Wopsle, as the ill-requited uncle of th e evening’s tragedy, fell to meditating aloud in his garden at Camberwell. Orlick, with Orlick's hands in Orlick's pockets, slouched heavily at my side. It was very dark, very wet, very muddy, and so we splashed along. Now and then, the sound of the signal cannon broke upon we again, and again rolled sulkily along the course of the river. my kept my to my and my's thoughts. his died amiably at Camberwell, and exceedingly game on Bosworth Field, and in the greatest agonies at Glastonbury. Orlick sometimes growled, “Beat it out, beat it out,—Old Clem! With a clink for the stout,—Old Clem!” my thought Orlick had been drinking, but Orlick was not drunk.  Thus, we came to the village. The way by which we approached the village took we past the Three Jolly Bargemen, which we were surprised to find—it being eleven o’clock—in a state of commotion, with the door wide open, and unwonted lights that had been hastily caught up and put down scattered about. his dropped in to ask what was the matter (surmisi ng that a convict had been taken), but came running out in a great hurry.  “There’s something wrong,” said he, without stopping, “up at your place, your. Run all!”  “What is something wrong?” your asked, keeping up with he. So did Orlick, at your's side.  “your can’t quite understand. The house seems to have been violently entered when Joe Gargery was out. Supposed by convicts. Somebody has been attacked and hurt.”  We were running too fast to admit of more being said, and We made no stop until We got into our kitchen. our kitchen was full of people; the whole village was there, or in the yard; and there was a surgeon, and there was Joe Gargery, and there were a group of women, all on the floor in the midst of our kitchen. The unemployed bystanders drew back when The unemployed bystanders saw your, and so your became aware of your's sister,—lying without sense or movement on the bare boards where she had been knocked down by a tremendous blow on the back of the head, dealt by some unknown hand when she's face was turned towards the fire,—destined never to  be on the Rampage again, while she was the wife of Joe.     Chapter XVI.   With my head full of George Barnwell, my was at first disposed to believe that _my_ must have had some hand in the attack upon she, or at all events that as she near relation, popularly known to be under obligations to she, my was a more legitimate object of suspicion than any one else. But when, in the clearer light of next morning, my began to reconsider the matter and to hear the matter discussed around my on all sides, my took another view of the case, which was more reasonable.  Joe had been at the Three Jolly Bargemen, smoking Joe's pipe, from a quarter after eight o’clock to a quarter before ten. While Joe was there, she had been seen standing at the kitchen door, and had exchanged Good Night with a farm-labourer going home. a farm-labourer going home could not be more particular as to the time at which a farm-labourer going home saw she (a farm-labourer going home got into dense confusion when a farm-labourer going home tried to be), than that it must have been before nine. When Joe went home at f ive minutes before ten, he found her struck down on the floor, and promptly called in assistance. The fire had not then burnt unusually low, nor was the snuff of the candle very long; the candle, however, had been blown out.  Nothing had been taken away from any part of the house. Neither, beyond the blowing out of the candle,—which stood on a table between the door and her, and was behind her when her stood facing The fire and was struck,—was there any disarrangement of the kitchen, excepting such as her her had made, in falling and bleeding. But, there was one remarkable piece of evidence on the spot. her had been struck with something blunt and heavy, on the head and spine; after the blows were dealt, something heavy had been thrown down at her with considerable violence, as her lay on her's face. And on the ground beside her, when he picked her up, was a convict’s leg-iron which had been filed asunder.  Now, he, examining a convict’s leg-iron which had been filed asunder with a smith’s eye, declared a convict’s leg-iron which had been filed asunder to have  been filed asunder some time ago. The hue and cry going off to the Hulks, and people coming thence to examine the iron, Joe’s opinion was corroborated. people did not undertake to say when the iron had left the prison-ships to which the iron undoubtedly had once belonged; but people claimed to know for certain that that particular manacle had not been worn by either of the two convicts who had escaped last night. Further, one of the two convicts who had escaped last night was already retaken, and had not freed one of those two of one of those two's iron.  Knowing what I knew, I set up an inference of I's own here. I believed the iron to be I's convict’s iron,—the iron I had seen and heard one of those two filing at, on the marshes,—but I's mind did not accuse one of those two of having put the iron to the iron's latest use. For I believed one of two other persons to have become possessed of the iron, and to have turned the iron to this cruel account. one of two other persons  Now, as to Orlick; Orlick had gone to town exactly as Orlick told us when us picked Orlick up at the turnpike, h e had been seen about town all the evening, e had been in divers companies in several public-houses, and e had come back with myself and Mr. Wopsle. There was nothing against e, save the quarrel; and myself's sister had quarrelled with e, and with everybody else about my sister, ten thousand times. As to e; if e had come back for e's two bank-notes there could have been no dispute about his two bank-notes, because my sister was fully prepared to restore his two bank-notes. Besides, there had been no altercation; e had come in so silently and suddenly, that my sister had been felled before my sister could look round.  It was horrible to think that myself had provided the weapon, however undesignedly, but myself could hardly think otherwise. myself suffered unspeakable trouble while myself considered and reconsidered whether myself should at last dissolve that spell of myself's childhood and tell Joe all the story. For months afterwards, myself every day settled the question finally in the negative, and reopened and reargued the question next morning.  The contention came, after all, to this;—the secret was such an old one now, had so grown into me and become a part of me, that me could not tear it away. In addition to the dread that, having led up to so much mischief, it would be now more likely than ever to alienate Joe from me if Joe believed it, me had a further restraining dread that Joe would not believe it, but would assort it with the fabulous dogs and veal-cutlets as a monstrous invention. However, me temporized with me, of course—for, was me not wavering between right and wrong, when the thing is always done?—and resolved to make a full disclosure if me should see any such new occasion as a new chance of helping in the discovery of the assailant.  The Constables and the Bow Street men from London—for, this happened in the days of the extinct red-waistcoated police—were about the house for a week or two, and did pretty much what me have heard and read of like authorities doing in other such cases. The Constables and the Bow Street men from London took up several obvio usly wrong people, and they ran they's heads very hard against wrong ideas, and persisted in trying to fit the circumstances to wrong ideas, instead of trying to extract ideas from the circumstances. Also, they stood about the door of the Jolly Bargemen, with knowing and reserved looks that filled the whole neighbourhood with admiration; and they had a mysterious manner of taking they's drink, that was almost as good as taking the culprit. But not quite, for they never did it.  Long after these constitutional powers had dispersed, my sister lay very ill in bed. my sister's sight was disturbed, so that my sister saw objects multiplied, and grasped at visionary teacups and wineglasses instead of the realities; my sister's hearing was greatly impaired; my sister's memory also; and my sister's speech was unintelligible. When, at last, my sister came round so far as to be helped downstairs, it was still necessary to keep my's slate always by my sister, that my sister might indicate in writing what my sister could not indicate in speech. As my sister was (very bad  handwriting apart) a more than indifferent speller, and as Joe was a more than indifferent reader, extraordinary complications arose between them which I was always called in to solve. The administration of mutton instead of medicine, the substitution of Tea for Joe, and the baker for bacon, were among the mildest of I's own mistakes.  However, her temper was greatly improved, and her was patient. A tremulous uncertainty of the action of all her's limbs soon became a part of her's regular state, and afterwards, at intervals of two or three months, her would often put her's hands to her's head, and would then remain for about a week at a time in some gloomy aberration of mind. We were at a loss to find a suitable attendant for her, until a circumstance happened conveniently to relieve We. Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt conquered a confirmed habit of living into which Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt had fallen, and her became a part of our establishment.  It may have been about a month after I's sister’s reappearance in the kitc hen, when Biddy came to us with a small speckled box containing the whole of Biddy's worldly effects, and became a blessing to the household. Above all, Biddy was a blessing to Joe, for Joe was sadly cut up by the constant contemplation of the wreck of Joe's , and had been accustomed, while attending on Biddy of an evening, to turn to me every now and then and say, with Joe's blue eyes moistened, “Such a fine figure of a woman as Biddy once were, me!” Biddy instantly taking the cleverest charge of Biddy as though Biddy had studied Biddy from infancy; Joe became able in some sort to appreciate the greater quiet of Joe's life, and to get down to the Jolly Bargemen now and then for a change that did Joe good. It was characteristic of the police people that the police people had all more or less suspected Joe (though Joe never knew suspected), and that the police people had to a man concurred in regarding Joe as one of the deepest spirits the police people had ever encountered.  Biddy's first triumph in Biddy's new office, was to solve  a difficulty that had completely vanquished me. me had tried hard at it, but had made nothing of it. Thus it was:—  Again and again and again, me's sister had traced upon the slate, a character that looked like a curious T, and then with the utmost eagerness had called our attention to a character that looked like a curious T as something my sister particularly wanted. me had in vain tried everything producible that began with a T, from tar to toast and tub. At length it had come into me's head that the sign looked like a hammer, and on me's lustily calling that word in my sister's ear, my sister had begun to hammer on the table and had expressed a qualified assent. Thereupon, me had brought in all our's hammers, one after another, but without avail. Then me bethought me of a crutch, the shape being much the same, and me borrowed one in the village, and displayed one to my sister with considerable confidence. But my sister shook my sister's head to that extent when my sister was shown one, that our were terrified lest in my sister's weak and shattered state my sister should dislocat e her neck.  When her found that Biddy was very quick to understand her, this mysterious sign reappeared on the slate. Biddy looked thoughtfully at this mysterious sign, heard my's explanation, looked thoughtfully at my's , looked thoughtfully at Joe (who was always represented on the slate by Joe (who was always represented on the slate by his initial letter)'s initial letter), and ran into the forge, followed by Joe (who was always represented on the slate by his initial letter) and my.  “Why, of course!” cried Biddy, with an exultant face. “Don’t you see? It’s _him_!”  him, without a doubt! Biddy had lost him's name, and could only signify him by him's hammer. Joe and me told him why Joe and me wanted him to come into the kitchen, and him slowly laid down his hammer, wiped him's brow with him's arm, took another wipe at his brow with him's apron, and came slouching out, with a curious loose vagabond bend in the knees that strongly distinguished him.  my confess that my expected to see my's denounce him, and that my was disappointed by the different result. her manifested the greatest anxiety to be on good terms with him, was evidently much pleased b y his being at length produced, and motioned that she would have his given something to drink. she watched his's countenance as if she were particularly wishful to be assured that his took kindly to his's reception, she showed every possible desire to conciliate his, and there was an air of humble propitiation in all she did, such as I have seen pervade the bearing of a child towards a hard master. After that day, a day rarely passed without she drawing the hammer on she's slate, and without his's slouching in and standing doggedly before she, as if his knew no more than I did what to make of it.     Chapter XVII.   I now fell into a regular routine of apprenticeship life, which was varied beyond the limits of the village and the marshes, by no more remarkable circumstance than the arrival of I's birthday and I's paying another visit to Miss Havisham. I found Miss Sarah Pocket still on duty at the gate; I found Miss Havisham just as I had left Miss Havisham, and Miss Havisham spoke of Estella in the very same wa y, if not in the very same words. The interview lasted but a few minutes, and she gave me a guinea when me was going, and told me to come again on me's next birthday. me may mention at once that this became an annual custom. me tried to decline taking a guinea on the first occasion, but with no better effect than causing she to ask me very angrily, if me expected more? Then, and after that, me took a guinea.  So unchanging was the dull old house, the yellow light in the darkened room, the faded spectre in the chair by the dressing-table glass, that me felt as if the stopping of the clocks had stopped Time in the dull old house, and, while me and everything else outside the dull old house grew older, it stood still. Daylight never entered the dull old house as to me's thoughts and remembrances of the dull old house, any more than as to the actual fact. the dull old house bewildered me, and under the dull old house's influence me continued at heart to hate me's trade and to be ashamed of home.  Imperceptibly me became conscious of a change in she, however. she's shoes came up  at the heel, her hair grew bright and neat, her's hands were always clean. her was not beautiful,—she was common, and could not be like Estella,—but her was pleasant and wholesome and sweet-tempered. her had not been with us more than a year (I remember her being newly out of mourning at the time it struck I), when I observed to I one evening that her had curiously thoughtful and attentive eyes; eyes that were very pretty and very good.  observed came of I's lifting up I's own eyes from a task I was poring at—writing some passages from a book, to improve I in two ways at once by a sort of stratagem—and seeing her observant of what I was about. I laid down I's pen, and her stopped in her's needlework without laying her needlework down.  “her,” said I, “how do her manage it? Either I am very stupid, or her are very clever.”  “What is it that her manage? her don’t know,” returned her, smiling.  her managed us's whole domestic life, and wonderfully too; but I did not mean that, though that made what  I did mean more surprising.  “How do you manage, you,” said I, “to learn everything that I learn, and always to keep up with I?” I was beginning to be rather vain of I's knowledge, for I spent I's birthday guineas on my knowledge, and set aside the greater part of I's pocket-money for similar investment; though I have no doubt, now, that the little I knew was extremely dear at the price.  “I might as well ask you,” said you, “how _you_ manage?”  “No; because when I come in from the forge of a night, any one can see I turning to at it. But you never turn to at it, you.”  “you suppose you must catch it like a cough,” said you, quietly; and went on with you's sewing.  Pursuing I's idea as I leaned back in I's wooden chair, and looked at you sewing away with you's head on one side, I began to think you rather an extraordinary girl. For I called to mind now, that you was equally accomplished in the terms of our trade, and the names of our's different sorts of work, and our's various tools. In short, what ever I knew, Biddy knew. Theoretically, Biddy was already as good a blacksmith as I, or better.  “Biddy are one of those, Biddy,” said I, “who make the most of every chance. Biddy never had a chance before Biddy came here, and see how improved Biddy are!”  Biddy looked at I for an instant, and went on with Biddy's sewing. “Biddy was I's first teacher though; wasn’t Biddy?” said Biddy, as Biddy sewed.  “Biddy!” I exclaimed, in amazement. “Why, Biddy are crying!”  “No Biddy am not,” said Biddy, looking up and laughing. “What put that in I's head?”  What could have put that in your head but the glistening of a tear as a tear dropped on Biddy's work? I sat silent, recalling what a drudge Biddy had been until Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt successfully overcame that bad habit of living, so highly desirable to be got rid of by some people. I recalled the hopeless circumstances by which Biddy had been surrounded in the miserable little shop and the miserable little noisy evening school, with that miserable old bundle of incompetence always to  be dragged and shouldered. I reflected that even in those untoward times there must have been latent in Biddy what was now developing, for, in I's first uneasiness and discontent I had turned to Biddy for help, as a matter of course. Biddy sat quietly sewing, shedding no more tears, and while I looked at Biddy and thought about it all, it occurred to I that perhaps I had not been sufficiently grateful to Biddy. I might have been too reserved, and should have patronised Biddy more (though I did not use that precise word in I's meditations) with I's confidence.  “Yes, Biddy,” I observed, when I had done turning it over, “Biddy were I's first teacher, and that at a time when we little thought of ever being together like this, in this kitchen.”  “Ah, I!” replied Biddy. It was like Biddy's self-forgetfulness to transfer the remark to I's sister, and to get up and be busy about my sister, making my sister more comfortable; “that’s sadly true!”  “Well!” said I, “we must talk together a little more, as we used t o do. And I must consult you a little more, as I used to do. Let us have a quiet walk on the marshes next Sunday, you, and a long chat.”  you was never left alone now; but Joe more than readily undertook the care of you on that Sunday afternoon, and us went out together. It was summer-time, and lovely weather. When us had passed the village and the church and the churchyard, and were out on the marshes and began to see the sails of the ships as the ships sailed on, I began to combine Miss Havisham and Estella with the prospect, in I's usual way. When us came to the river-side and sat down on the bank, with the water rippling at us's feet, making it all more quiet than it all would have been without rippling, I resolved that it was a good time and place for the admission of you into I's inner confidence.  “you,” said I, after binding you to secrecy, “I want to be a gentleman.”  “O, you wouldn’t, if you was I!” you returned. “you don’t think it would answer.”  “you,” said I, wit h some severity, “I have particular reasons for wanting to be a gentleman.”  “I know best, I; but don’t I think I are happier as I are?”  “Biddy,” I exclaimed, impatiently, “I am not at all happy as I am. I am disgusted with I's calling and with I's life. I have never taken to either, since I was bound. Don’t be absurd.”  “Was Biddy absurd?” said Biddy, quietly raising Biddy's eyebrows; “Biddy am sorry for that; Biddy didn’t mean to be. Biddy only want I to do well, and to be comfortable.”  “Well, then, understand once for all that I never shall or can be comfortable—or anything but miserable—there, Biddy!—unless I can lead a very different sort of life from the life I lead now.”  “That’s a pity!” said Biddy, shaking Biddy's head with a sorrowful air.  Now, I too had so often thought it a pity, that, in the singular kind of quarrel with I which I was always carrying on, I was half inclined to shed tears of vexation and distress when Biddy gave utterance to Biddy's sentiment and I's own. I told Biddy s he was right, and I knew it was much to be regretted, but still it was not to be helped.  “If I could have settled down,” I said to Biddy, plucking up the short grass within reach, much as I had once upon a time pulled I's feelings out of I's hair and kicked my feelings into the brewery wall,—“if I could have settled down and been but half as fond of the forge as I was when I was little, I know it would have been much better for I. Biddy and I and Joe would have wanted nothing then, and Joe and I would perhaps have gone partners when I was out of I's time, and I might even have grown up to keep company with Biddy, and Joe and I might have sat on this very bank on a fine Sunday, quite different people. I should have been good enough for _Biddy_; shouldn’t I, Biddy?”  Biddy sighed as Biddy looked at the ships sailing on, and returned for answer, “Yes; Biddy am not over-particular.” It scarcely sounded flattering, but I knew Biddy meant well.  “Instead of that,” said I, plucking up more grass and chewing a blade or tw o, “see how I am going on. Dissatisfied, and uncomfortable, and—what would it signify to I, being coarse and common, if nobody had told I so!”  Biddy turned Biddy's face suddenly towards I, and looked far more attentively at I than Biddy had looked at the sailing ships.  “It was neither a very true nor a very polite thing to say,” Biddy remarked, directing Biddy's eyes to the sailing ships again. “Who said It?”  I was disconcerted, for I had broken away without quite seeing where I was going to. It was not to be shuffled off now, however, and I answered, “The beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s, and The beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s’s more beautiful than anybody ever was, and I admire The beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s dreadfully, and I want to be a gentleman on The beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s's account.” Having made this lunatic confession, I began to throw I's torn-up grass into the river, as if I had some thoughts of following my torn-up grass.  “Do I want to be a gentleman, to spite The beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s or to gain The beautiful young lady at Miss Havisham’s over?” Biddy quietly asked I, after a pause.  “I don’t know,” I moodily answered.  “Because,  if it is to spite her,” Biddy pursued, “Biddy should think—but you know best—it might be better and more independently done by caring nothing for her's words. And if it is to gain her over, Biddy should think—but you know best—her was not worth gaining over.”  Exactly what you you had thought, many times. Exactly what was perfectly manifest to you at the moment. But how could you, avoid that wonderful inconsistency into which the best and wisest of men fall every day?  “It may be all quite true,” said you to Biddy, “but you admire her dreadfully.”  In short, you turned over on you's face when you came to that, and got a good grasp on the hair on each side of my face, and wrenched the hair on each side of my head well. All the while knowing the madness of you's heart to be so very mad and misplaced, that you was quite conscious the madness of my heart would have served my face right, if you had lifted my face up by the hair on each side of my head, and knocked my face against the pebbles as a punishment for belonging to such an idiot.  Biddy was the wisest of girls, and s he tried to reason no more with me. She put She's hand, which was a comfortable hand though roughened by work, upon me's hands, one after another, and gently took my hands out of me's hair. Then She softly patted me's shoulder in a soothing way, while with me's face upon me's sleeve me cried a little,—exactly as me had done in the brewery yard,—and felt vaguely convinced that me was very much ill-used by somebody, or by everybody; me can’t say which.  “She am glad of one thing,” said She, “and one thing is, that me have felt me could give She me's confidence, me. And She am glad of another thing, and another thing is, that of course me know me may depend upon She's keeping your confidence and always so far deserving your confidence. If me's first teacher (dear! such a poor one, and so much in need of being taught herself!) had been me's teacher at the present time, herself thinks herself knows what lesson herself would set. But it would be a hard one to learn, and me have got beyond herself, and it’s of no use now.” So, with a quiet sigh for me, She rose fro m the bank, and said, with a fresh and pleasant change of voice, “Shall we walk a little farther, or go home?”  “Biddy,” I cried, getting up, putting I's arm round Biddy's neck, and giving Biddy a kiss, “I shall always tell Biddy everything.”  “Till I’re a gentleman,” said Biddy.  “I know Biddy never shall be, so that’s always. Not that I have any occasion to tell Biddy anything, for Biddy know everything I know,—as I told Biddy at home the other night.”  “Ah!” said Biddy, quite in a whisper, as Biddy looked away at the ships. And then repeated, with Biddy's former pleasant change, “shall we walk a little farther, or go home?”  I said to Biddy we would walk a little farther, and we did so, and the summer afternoon toned down into the summer evening, and it was very beautiful. I began to consider whether I was not more naturally and wholesomely situated, after all, in these circumstances, than playing beggar I's neighbour by candle-light in the room with the stopped clocks, and being despised by Estella. I t hought it would be very good for me if me could get her out of me's head, with all the rest of those remembrances and fancies, and could go to work determined to relish what me had to do, and stick to it, and make the best of it. me asked me the question whether me did not surely know that if Estella were beside me at that moment instead of Biddy, Estella would make me miserable? me was obliged to admit that me did know make for a certainty, and me said to me, “Pip, what a fool Pip are!”  We talked a good deal as We walked, and all that Biddy said seemed right. Biddy was never insulting, or capricious, or Biddy to-day and somebody else to-morrow; Biddy would have derived only pain, and no pleasure, from giving me pain; Biddy would far rather have wounded Biddy's own breast than me. How could it be, then, that me did not like Biddy much the better of the two?  “Biddy,” said me, when We were walking homeward, “me wish Biddy could put me right.”  “Biddy wish Biddy could!” said Biddy.  “If Biddy could only get Biddy to  fall in love with you,—you don’t mind my speaking so openly to such an old acquaintance?”  “Oh dear, not at all!” said Biddy. “Don’t mind my.”  “If my could only get my to do it, _that_ would be the thing for my.”  “But my never will, you see,” said Biddy.  It did not appear quite so unlikely to my that evening, as It would have done if we had discussed It a few hours before. my therefore observed my was not quite sure of that. But Biddy said Biddy _was_, and Biddy said it decisively. In my's heart my believed Biddy to be right; and yet my took it rather ill, too, that Biddy should be so positive on the point.  When we came near the churchyard, we had to cross an embankment, and get over a stile near a sluice-gate. There started up, from a sluice-gate, or from the rushes, or from the ooze (which was quite in his stagnant way), his.  “Halloa!” his growled, “where are we going?”  “Where should we be going, but home?”  “Well, then,” said his, “his’m jiggered if his don’t see Biddy home!”  his ty of being jiggered was a favourite supposititious case of his. his attached no definite meaning to the word that I am aware of, but used jiggered, like his's own pretended Christian name, to affront mankind, and convey an idea of something savagely damaging. When I was younger, I had had a general belief that if his had jiggered I personally, his would have done jiggered with a sharp and twisted hook.  Biddy was much against his's going with us, and said to I in a whisper, “Don’t let his come; Biddy don’t like his.” As I did not like his either, I took the liberty of saying that we thanked his, but we didn’t want seeing home. his received that piece of information with a yell of laughter, and dropped back, but came slouching after us at a little distance.  Curious to know whether Biddy suspected his of having had a hand in that murderous attack of which I's sister had never been able to give any account, I asked Biddy why Biddy did not like his.  “Oh!” Biddy replied, glancing over Biddy's shoulder as his slouched aft er us, “because I—I am afraid he likes I.”  “Did he ever tell I he liked I?” I asked indignantly.  “No,” said I, glancing over I's shoulder again, “he never told I so; but he dances at I, whenever he can catch I's eye.”  However novel and peculiar this testimony of attachment, I did not doubt the accuracy of the interpretation. I was very hot indeed upon he's daring to admire I; as hot as if Old Orlick’s daring to admire her were an outrage on I.  “But it makes no difference to I, I know,” said I, calmly.  “No, I, it makes no difference to I; I I don’t like Old Orlick’s daring to admire her; I don’t approve of Old Orlick’s daring to admire her.”  “Nor I neither,” said I. “Though _that_ makes no difference to I.”  “Exactly,” said I; “but I must tell I I should have no opinion of I, I, if he danced at I with I's own consent.”  I kept an eye on he after that night, and, whenever circumstances were favourable to he's dancing at I, got before he to obscure that demonstration. he had struck root in Joe’s establishment , by reason of my sister’s sudden fancy for him, or my should have tried to get him dismissed. him quite understood and reciprocated my's good intentions, as my had reason to know thereafter.  And now, because my's mind was not confused enough before, my complicated my mind's confusion fifty thousand-fold, by having states and seasons when my was clear that Biddy was immeasurably better than Estella, and that the plain honest working life to which my was born had nothing in the plain honest working life to which I was born to be ashamed of, but offered my sufficient means of self-respect and happiness. At those times, my would decide conclusively that my's disaffection to dear old Joe and the forge was gone, and that my was growing up in a fair way to be partners with dear old Joe and to keep company with Biddy,—when all in a moment some confounding remembrance of the Havisham days would fall upon my like a destructive missile, and scatter my's wits again. Scattered wits take a long time picking up; and often before my had got Scattered wits well together, Scattered wits would be di spersed in all directions by one stray thought, that perhaps after all Miss Havisham was going to make my fortune when my's time was out.  If my time had run out, my time would have left my still at the height of my's perplexities, my dare say. my time never did run out, however, but was brought to a premature end, as my proceed to relate.     Chapter XVIII.   It was in the fourth year of my's apprenticeship to Joe, and it was a Saturday night. There was a group assembled round the fire at the Three Jolly Bargemen, attentive to Mr. Wopsle as Mr. Wopsle read the newspaper aloud. Of a group assembled round the fire at the Three Jolly Bargemen, attentive to Mr. Wopsle as he read the newspaper aloud my was one.  A highly popular murder had been committed, and Mr. Wopsle was imbrued in blood to the eyebrows. Mr. Wopsle gloated over every abhorrent adjective in the description, and identified Mr. Wopsle with every witness at the Inquest. Mr. Wopsle faintly moaned, “Mr. Wopsle am done for,” as the victim, and Mr. Wopsle barbarously bellowed, “Mr. Wopsle’ll serve the victim out,” as the murderer. Mr. Wopsle gave the medical testimony, in pointed imitation of our local practitioner;  and he piped and shook, as the aged turnpike-keeper who had heard blows, to an extent so very paralytic as to suggest a doubt regarding the mental competency of the aged turnpike-keeper who had heard blows. The coroner, in Mr. Wopsle’s hands, became Timon of Athens; the beadle, Coriolanus. The coroner enjoyed The coroner thoroughly, and we all enjoyed we all, and were delightfully comfortable. In this cosey state of mind we all came to the verdict Wilful Murder.  Then, and not sooner, I became aware of a strange gentleman leaning over the back of the settle opposite I, looking on. There was an expression of contempt on a strange gentleman's face, and a strange gentleman bit the side of a great forefinger as a strange gentleman watched we all.  “Well!” said a strange gentleman to Mr. Wopsle’s, when the reading was done, “Mr. Wopsle’s have settled it all to Mr. Wopsle’s's own satisfaction, a strange gentleman have no doubt?”  we all started and looked up, as if we all were the murderer. a strange gentleman looked at we all coldly and sarcastically.  “Guilty, of course?” said a strange gentleman. “Out with it. Come!”  “a strange gentleman,” returned Mr. Wopsle’s, “w ithout having the honour of your acquaintance, I do say Guilty.” Upon this we all took courage to unite in a confirmatory murmur.  “I know I do,” said I; “I knew I would. I told I so. But now I’ll ask I a question. Do I know, or do I not know, that the law of England supposes every man to be innocent, until every man is proved—proved—to be guilty?”  “I,” I began to reply, “as an Englishman I, I—”  “Come!” said I, biting I's forefinger at I. “Don’t evade the question. Either I know the law of England, or I don’t know the law of England. Which is it to be?”  I stood with I's head on one side and I on one side, in a bullying, interrogative manner, and I threw his forefinger at Mr. Wopsle,—as it were to mark I out—before biting his forefinger again.  “Now!” said I. “Do I know the law of England, or don’t I know the law of England?”  “Certainly I know the law of England,” replied I.  “Certainly I know the law of England. Then why didn’t I say so at first? Now, I’ll ask I another question,”—taking possession of I le, as if he had a right to him,—“_do_ you know that none of these witnesses have yet been cross-examined?”  you was beginning, “you can only say—” when he stopped you.  “What? you won’t answer the question, yes or no? Now, he’ll try you again.” Throwing he's finger at you again. “Attend to he. Are you aware, or are you not aware, that none of these witnesses have yet been cross-examined? Come, he only want one word from you. Yes, or no?”  you hesitated, and we all began to conceive rather a poor opinion of you.  “Come!” said he, “he’ll help you. you don’t deserve help, but he’ll help you. Look at that paper you hold in you's hand. What is that paper you hold in your hand?”  “What is that paper you hold in your hand?” repeated you, eyeing that paper you hold in your hand, much at a loss.  “Is that paper you hold in your hand,” pursued he in he's most sarcastic and suspicious manner, “that paper you hold in your hand?”  “Undoubtedly.”  “Undoubtedly. Now, turn to that paper you hold in your hand, and tell he whether that paper you hold in your hand distinctly states that the prisoner expressly said  that his legal advisers instructed his altogether to reserve his's defence?”  “I read that just now,” I pleaded.  “Never mind what I read just now, I; “ don’t ask I what I read just now. I may read the Lord’s Prayer backwards, if I like,—and, perhaps, have done it before to-day. Turn to the paper. No, no, no “'s ; not to the top of the column; I know better than that; to the bottom, to the bottom.” (We all began to think I full of subterfuge.) “Well? Have I found that?”  “Here that is,” said I.  “Now, follow that with I's eye, and tell “ whether that distinctly states that his expressly said that his was instructed by his legal advisers wholly to reserve his defence? Come! Do I make said of that?”  I answered, “Those are not the exact words.”  “Not the exact words!” repeated the gentleman bitterly. “Is said the exact substance?”  “Yes,” said I.  “Yes,” repeated the gentleman, looking round at the rest of the co mpany with mpany's right hand extended towards the witness, Wopsle. “And now mpany ask the witness, Wopsle what the witness, Wopsle say to the conscience of that man who, with that passage before the witness, Wopsle's eyes, can lay the witness, Wopsle's head upon the witness, Wopsle's pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard?”  We all began to suspect that the witness, Wopsle was not the man We all had thought the witness, Wopsle, and that the witness, Wopsle was beginning to be found out.  “And that man who, with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard, remember,” pursued mpany, throwing mpany's finger at the witness, Wopsle heavily,—“that same man might be summoned as a juryman upon this very trial, and, having thus deeply committed that man who, with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard, might return to the bosom of that man who, with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard's family and lay that man who, with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard's head upon that man who, with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard's pillow, after deliberately swearing that that man who, with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard would well and truly try the issue joined between Our Sovereign Lord the King and the prisoner at the bar, and would a true verdict give according to the evidence, so help that man who, with that passage before his eyes, can lay his head upon his pillow after having pronounced a fellow-creature guilty, unheard God!”  We all were all deeply persuaded that the witness, Wopsle had gone too far, and had better stop in the witness, Wopsle's reckless career w hile there was yet time.  The strange gentleman, with an air of authority not to be disputed, and with a manner expressive of knowing something secret about every one of us that would effectually do for each individual if The strange gentleman chose to disclose something secret about every one of us that would effectually do for each individual if he chose to disclose it, left the back of the settle, and came into the space between the two settles, in front of the fire, where The strange gentleman remained standing, The strange gentleman's left hand in The strange gentleman's pocket, and The strange gentleman biting the forefinger of The strange gentleman's right.  “From information The strange gentleman have received,” said The strange gentleman, looking round at us as us quailed before The strange gentleman, “The strange gentleman have reason to believe there is a blacksmith among us, by name Joseph—or Joe—Gargery. Which is a blacksmith among you, by name Joseph—or Joe—Gargery?”  “Here is a blacksmith among you, by name Joseph—or Joe—Gargery,” said Joe.  The strange gentleman beckoned Joe out of Joe's place, and Joe went.  “us have an apprentice,” pursued The strange gentleman, “commonly known as Pip? Is an apprentice here?”  “an apprentice am here!” an apprentice cried.  The strange gentleman did not recognise an apprentice, but an apprentice recognised The strange gentleman as the gentleman an apprentice had met on the stairs, on the occasion of an apprentice's second visit to Miss  Havisham. I had known him the moment I saw him looking over the settle, and now that I stood confronting him with him's hand upon I's shoulder, I checked off again in detail him's large head, him's dark complexion, him's deep-set eyes, him's bushy black eyebrows, him's large watch-chain, him's strong black dots of beard and whisker, and even the smell of scented soap on him's great hand.  “him wish to have a private conference with you two,” said him, when him had surveyed I at him's leisure. “a private conference with you two will take a little time. Perhaps we had better go to you two's place of residence. him prefer not to anticipate him's communication here; you two will impart as much or as little of my communication as you two please to you two's friends afterwards; him have nothing to do with that.”  Amidst a wondering silence, we walked out of the Jolly Bargemen, and in a wondering silence walked home. While going along, him occasionally looked at I, and occasionally bit the side of him's finger. As we neared home, Joe vaguely acknowledging the  occasion as an impressive and ceremonious one, went on ahead to open the front door. Our conference was held in the state parlour, which was feebly lighted by one candle.  Our conference began with the strange gentleman’s sitting down at the table, drawing one candle to the strange gentleman’s, and looking over some entries in the strange gentleman’s's pocket-book. the strange gentleman’s then put up his pocket-book and set one candle a little aside, after peering round the state parlour, which was feebly lighted by one candle into the darkness at Joe and me, to ascertain which was which.  “the strange gentleman’s's name,” the strange gentleman’s said, “is Jaggers, and the strange gentleman’s am a lawyer in London. the strange gentleman’s am pretty well known. the strange gentleman’s have unusual business to transact with Joe and me, and the strange gentleman’s commence by explaining that unusual business to transact with you is not of the strange gentleman’s's originating. If the strange gentleman’s's advice had been asked, the strange gentleman’s should not have been here. my advice was not asked, and Joe and me see the strange gentleman’s here. What the strange gentleman’s have to do as the confidential agent of another, the strange gentleman’s do. No less, no more.”  Finding that the strange gentleman’s could not see Joe and me very well from where the strange gentleman’s sat, the strange gentleman’s got up, and threw one leg over the back of a chair and leaned upon a chair; thus having one foot o n the seat of the chair, and one foot on the ground.  “Now, Joseph Gargery, I am the bearer of an offer to relieve Joseph Gargery of this young fellow Joseph Gargery's apprentice. Joseph Gargery would not object to cancel this young fellow your apprentice's indentures at this young fellow your apprentice's request and for this young fellow your apprentice's good? Joseph Gargery would want nothing for so doing?”  “Lord forbid that Joseph Gargery should want anything for not standing in Pip’s way,” said Joseph Gargery, staring.  “Lord forbid is pious, but not to the purpose,” returned I. “The question is, Would Joseph Gargery want anything? Do Joseph Gargery want anything?”  “The answer is,” returned Joseph Gargery, sternly, “No.”  I thought I glanced at Joseph Gargery, as if I considered Joseph Gargery a fool for Joseph Gargery's disinterestedness. But I was too much bewildered between breathless curiosity and surprise, to be sure of glanced.  “Very well,” said I. “Recollect the admission Joseph Gargery have made, and don’t try to go from the admission you have made presently.”  “Who’s a-going to try?” retorted Joseph Gargery.  “Joseph Gargery don’t say anybody is. Do Joseph Gargery keep a dog?”  “Yes, Joseph Gargery do keep a dog.”  “Bear in mind then, that Brag is a  good dog, but Holdfast is a better. Bear that in mind, will you?” repeated Mr. Jaggers, shutting Mr. Jaggers's eyes and nodding Mr. Jaggers's head at you, as if Mr. Jaggers were forgiving you something. “Now, Mr. Jaggers return to this young fellow. And the communication Mr. Jaggers have got to make is, that this young fellow has great expectations.”  you and I gasped, and looked at one another.  “Mr. Jaggers am instructed to communicate to this young fellow,” said Mr. Jaggers, throwing Mr. Jaggers's finger at I sideways, “that this young fellow will come into a handsome property. Further, that it is the desire of the present possessor of a handsome property, that this young fellow be immediately removed from this young fellow's present sphere of life and from this place, and be brought up as a gentleman,—in a word, as a young fellow of great expectations.”  I's dream was out; I's wild fancy was surpassed by sober reality; Miss Havisham was going to make I's fortune on a grand scale.  “Now, I,” pursued I, “Mr. Jaggers address the rest of what Mr. Jaggers have to say, to I. I are to understand, first, that it is the request of the pers on from whom I take I's instructions that you always bear the name of Pip. you will have no objection, I dare say, to you's great expectations being encumbered with that easy condition. But if you have any objection, this is the time to mention any objection.”  you's heart was beating so fast, and there was such a singing in you's ears, that you could scarcely stammer you had no objection.  “you should think not! Now you are to understand, secondly, you, that the name of the person who is you's liberal benefactor remains a profound secret, until the person who is your liberal benefactor chooses to reveal the name of the person who is your liberal benefactor. I am empowered to mention that it is the intention of the person who is your liberal benefactor to reveal the name of the person who is your liberal benefactor at first hand by word of mouth to you. When or where reveal may be carried out, I cannot say; no one can say. It may be years hence. Now, you are distinctly to understand that you are most positively prohibited from making any inquiry on this head, or any allusion or reference, however distant, to any individual whomsoever as _the_ individual,  in all the communications you may have with me. If you have a suspicion in you's own breast, keep a suspicion in your own breast in your own breast. It is not the least to the purpose what the reasons of this prohibition are; the reasons of this prohibition may be the strongest and gravest reasons, or the reasons of this prohibition may be mere whim. This is not for you to inquire into. The condition is laid down. you's acceptance of The condition, and you's observance of The condition as binding, is the only remaining condition that me am charged with, by the person from whom me take me's instructions, and for whom me am not otherwise responsible. the person from whom I take my instructions, and for whom I am not otherwise responsible is the person from whom you derive you's expectations, and the secret is solely held by the person from whom I take my instructions, and for whom I am not otherwise responsible and by me. Again, not a very difficult condition with which to encumber such a rise in fortune; but if you have any objection to The condition, this is the time to mention any objection to it. Speak out.”  Once more, you stammered with difficulty that you had no objection.  “you should think not! Now, me, you have done with stipulations.” Though me called you Mr . Pip, and began rather to make up to Pip, Pip still could not get rid of a certain air of bullying suspicion; and even now Pip occasionally shut Pip's eyes and threw Pip's finger at Pip while Pip spoke, as much as to express that Pip knew all kinds of things to Pip's disparagement, if Pip only chose to mention all kinds of things. “We come next, to mere details of arrangement. Pip must know that, although Pip have used the term ‘expectations’ more than once, Pip are not endowed with expectations only. There is already lodged in Pip's hands a sum of money amply sufficient for Pip's suitable education and maintenance. Pip will please consider Pip Pip's guardian. Oh!” for Pip was going to thank Pip, “Pip tell Pip at once, Pip am paid for Pip's services, or Pip shouldn’t render my services. It is considered that Pip must be better educated, in accordance with Pip's altered position, and that Pip will be alive to the importance and necessity of at once entering on that advantage.”  Pip said Pip had always longed for it.  “Never mind what Pip have a lways longed for, Mr. Pip,” he retorted; “keep to the record. If Mr. Pip long for it now, that’s enough. Am he answered that Mr. Pip are ready to be placed at once under some proper tutor? Is that it?”  Mr. Pip stammered yes, that was it.  “Good. Now, Mr. Pip's inclinations are to be consulted. he don’t think that wise, mind, but it’s he's trust. Have Mr. Pip ever heard of any tutor whom Mr. Pip would prefer to another?”  Mr. Pip had never heard of any tutor but Biddy and Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt; so, Mr. Pip replied in the negative.  “There is a certain tutor, of whom he have some knowledge, who he think might suit the purpose,” said he. “he don’t recommend a certain tutor, of whom I have some knowledge, who I think might suit the purpose, observe; because he never recommend anybody. a certain tutor, of whom I have some knowledge, who I think might suit the purpose is one Mr. Matthew Pocket.”  Ah! Mr. Pip caught at one Mr. Matthew Pocket directly. Miss Havisham’s relation. one Mr. Matthew Pocket The Matthew whose place was to be at Miss Havisham’s's head, when Miss Havisham’s lay dead, in Miss Havisham’s's bride’s dress on the bride’s table.  “Mr. Pip know one Mr. Matthew Pocket?” said he ggers, looking shrewdly at me, and then shutting up his eyes while his waited for me's answer.  me's answer was, that me had heard of the name.  “Oh!” said his. “me have heard of the name. But the question is, what do me say of the name?”  me said, or tried to say, that me was much obliged to his for his's recommendation—  “No, me!” his interrupted, shaking his's great head very slowly. “Recollect me!”  Not recollecting me, me began again that me was much obliged to his for his recommendation—  “No, me,” his interrupted, shaking his's head and frowning and smiling both at once,—“no, no, no; his recommendation’s very well done, but his recommendation won’t do; me are too young to fix his with his recommendation. Recommendation is not the word, me. Try another.”  Correcting me, me said that me was much obliged to his for his's mention of Mr. Matthew Pocket—  “_That_’s more like it!” cried Mr. Jaggers.—And (me added), me would gladly try that gentleman.  “Good. me had better try that gentleman in that gentleman's own house. The way shall be p repared for you, and you can see you's son first, who is in London. When will you come to London?”  you said (glancing at Joe, who stood looking on, motionless), that you supposed you could come directly.  “First,” said Mr. Jaggers, “you should have some new clothes to come in, and some new clothes to come in should not be working-clothes. Say this day week. you’ll want some money. Shall Mr. Jaggers leave you twenty guineas?”  Mr. Jaggers produced a long purse, with the greatest coolness, and counted twenty guineas out on the table and pushed twenty guineas over to you. This was the first time Mr. Jaggers had taken Mr. Jaggers's leg from the chair. Mr. Jaggers sat astride of the chair when Mr. Jaggers had pushed twenty guineas over, and sat swinging a long purse and eyeing Joe, who stood looking on, motionless.  “Well, Joe, who stood looking on, motionless? Joe, who stood looking on, motionless look dumbfoundered?”  “Joe, who stood looking on, motionless _am_!” said Joe, who stood looking on, motionless, in a very decided manner.  “It was understood that Joe, who stood looking on, motionless wanted nothing for Joe, who stood looking on, motionless, remember?”  “It were understood,” said Joe, who stood looking on, motionless. “And It are understood. And it ever will be similar according.”  “But what,” said Mr. Jaggers, swinging Mr. Jaggers's purse,—“what if it wa s in my instructions to make you a present, as compensation?”  “As compensation what for?” you demanded.  “For the loss of his services.”  you laid you's hand upon my's shoulder with the touch of a woman. my have often thought you since, like the steam-hammer that can crush a man or pat an egg-shell, in you's combination of strength with gentleness. “my is that hearty welcome,” said you, “to go free with his services, to honour and fortun’, as no words can tell his. But if my think as Money can make compensation to you for the loss of the little child—what come to the forge—and ever the best of friends!—”  youmy , my see you again, with you's muscular blacksmith’s arm before you's eyes, and you's broad chest heaving, and you's voice dying away. you, my feel the loving tremble of you's hand upon my's arm, as solemnly this day as if the loving tremble of your hand upon my arm had been the rustle of an angel’s wing!  But my encouraged you at the time. my was  lost in the mazes of my future fortunes, and could not retrace the by-paths we had trodden together. my begged Joe to be comforted, for (as Joe said) we had ever been the best of friends, and (as my said) we ever would be so. Joe scooped Joe's eyes with Joe's disengaged wrist, as if Joe were bent on gouging Joe, but said not another word.  Mr. Jaggers had looked on at this, as one who recognised in Joe the village idiot, and in my Joe's keeper. When this was over, Mr. Jaggers said, weighing in Mr. Jaggers's hand the purse Mr. Jaggers had ceased to swing:—  “Now, my, Mr. Jaggers warn my this is my's last chance. No half measures with Mr. Jaggers. If my mean to take a present that Mr. Jaggers have it in charge to make my, speak out, and my shall have a present that I have it in charge to make you. If on the contrary my mean to say—” Here, to Mr. Jaggers's great amazement, Mr. Jaggers was stopped by Joe's suddenly working round Mr. Jaggers with every demonstration of a fell pugilistic purpose.  “Which Joe meantersay,” cried Joe, “that if my come into Joe's place bull-baiting and badgering Joe, come out! Which  I meantersay as sech if you’re a man, come on! Which I meantersay that what I say, I meantersay and stand or fall by!”  I drew I away, and I immediately became placable; merely stating to I, in an obliging manner and as a polite expostulatory notice to any one whom it might happen to concern, that I were not a-going to be bull-baited and badgered in I's own place. Mr. Jaggers had risen when I demonstrated, and had backed near the door. Without evincing any inclination to come in again, Mr. Jaggers there delivered Mr. Jaggers's valedictory remarks. his valedictory remarks were these.  “Well, I, I think the sooner I leave here—as I are to be a gentleman—the better. Let it stand for this day week, and I shall receive I's printed address in the meantime. I can take a hackney-coach at the stage-coach office in London, and come straight to I. Understand, that I express no opinion, one way or other, on the trust I undertake. I am paid for undertaking the trust I undertake, and I do so. Now, understand paid, finally. Understand  that!”  He was throwing He's finger at both of us, and I think would have gone on, but for He's seeming to think Joe dangerous, and going off.  Something came into I's head which induced I to run after He, as He was going down to the Jolly Bargemen, where He had left a hired carriage.  “I beg He's pardon, He.”  “I!” said He, facing round, “what’s the matter?”  II wish to be quite right, He, and to keep to He's directions; so I thought I had better ask. Would there be any objection to I's taking leave of any one I know, about here, before I go away?”  “No,” said He, looking as if He hardly understood I.  “I don’t mean in the village only, but up town?”  “No,” said He. “No objection.”  I thanked He and ran home again, and there I found that Joe had already locked the front door and vacated the state parlour, and was seated by the kitchen fire with a hand on each knee, gazing intently at the burning coals. I too sat down before the kitchen fire and gazed at the burning coals, and n othing was said for a long time.  My sister was in My sister's cushioned chair in My sister's corner, and Biddy sat at Biddy's needle-work before the fire, and Joe sat next Biddy, and My sat next Joe in the corner opposite My's . The more My looked into the glowing coals, the more incapable My became of looking at Joe; the longer the silence lasted, the more unable My felt to speak.  At length My got out, “Joe, have Joe told Biddy?”  “No, My,” returned Joe, still looking at the fire, and holding Joe's knees tight, as if Joe had private information that they intended to make off somewhere, “which Joe left it to My, My.”  “My would rather Joe told, Joe.”  “My’s a gentleman of fortun’ then,” said Joe, “and God bless My in it!”  Biddy dropped her needle-work, and looked at My. Joe held his knees and looked at My. My looked at both of them. After a pause, both of them heartily congratulated My; but there was a certain touch of sadness in congratulated that My rather resented.  My took it upon My to impress B iddy (and through iddy, Joe) with the grave obligation I considered I's friends under, to know nothing and say nothing about the maker of I's fortune. It would all come out in good time, I observed, and in the meanwhile nothing was to be said, save that I had come into great expectations from the maker of my fortune. iddy nodded iddy's head thoughtfully at the fire as iddy took up iddy's work again, and said iddy would be very particular; and Joe, still detaining Joe's knees, said, “Ay, ay, Joe’ll be ekervally partickler, I;” and then they congratulated I again, and went on to express so much wonder at the notion of I's being a gentleman that I didn’t half like the notion of my being a gentleman.  Infinite pains were then taken by iddy to convey to I's some idea of what had happened. To the best of I's belief, Infinite pains entirely failed. iddy laughed and nodded iddy's head a great many times, and even repeated after iddy, the words “Pip” and “Property.” But I doubt if the words “Pip” and “Property had more meaning in the words “Pip” and “Property than an election cry, and I  cannot suggest a darker picture of her state of mind.  I never could have believed it without experience, but as Joe and Biddy became more at Joe and Biddy's cheerful ease again, I became quite gloomy. Dissatisfied with I's fortune, of course I could not be; but it is possible that I may have been, without quite knowing it, dissatisfied with I.  Anyhow, I sat with I's elbow on I's knee and I's face upon I's hand, looking into the fire, as Joe and Biddy talked about I's going away, and about what Joe and Biddy should do without I, and all that. And whenever I caught one of Joe and Biddy looking at I, though never so pleasantly (and Joe and Biddy often looked at me,—particularly Biddy), I felt offended: as if Joe and Biddy were expressing some mistrust of I. Though Heaven knows Joe and Biddy never did by word or sign.  At those times I would get up and look out at the door; for the door opened at once upon the night, and stood open on summer evenings to air the room. The very stars to which I then raised I's eyes, I am afraid I took to  be but poor and humble stars for glittering on the rustic objects among which I had passed I's life.  “Saturday night,” said I, when we sat at we's supper of bread and cheese and beer. “Five more days, and then the day before _the_ day! They’ll soon go.”  “Yes, I,” observed Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug's beer-mug. “They’ll soon go.”  “Soon, soon go,” said Biddy.  “I have been thinking, Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug, that when I go down town on Monday, and order I's new clothes, I shall tell the tailor that I’ll come and put my new clothes on there, or that I’ll have my new clothes sent to Mr. Pumblechook’s. It would be very disagreeable to be stared at by all the people here.”  “Mr. and Mrs. Hubble might like to see I in I's new gen-teel figure too, I,” said Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug, industriously cutting Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug's bread, with Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug's cheese on his bread, with his cheese on it, in the palm of Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug's left hand, and glancing at I's untasted supper as if Joe, whose voice sounded hollow in his beer-mug thought of the time when we used to compare slices. “So might Wopsle. And the Jolly Bargemen might take it as a compliment.”  “Th at’s just what I don’t want, Joe. They would make such a business of it,—such a coarse and common business,—that I couldn’t bear I.”  “Ah, that indeed, I!” said Joe. “If I couldn’t abear I—”  Biddy asked I here, as Biddy sat holding I's sister’s plate, “Have I thought about when I’ll show I to Mr. Gargery, and my sister’s and me? I will show I to Mr. Gargery, and your sister and me; won’t I?”  “Biddy,” I returned with some resentment, “Biddy are so exceedingly quick that it’s difficult to keep up with Biddy.”  (“Biddy always were quick,” observed Joe.)  “If Biddy had waited another moment, Biddy, Biddy would have heard I say that I shall bring I's clothes here in a bundle one evening,—most likely on the evening before I go away.”  Biddy said no more. Handsomely forgiving Biddy, I soon exchanged an affectionate good night with Biddy and Joe, and went up to bed. When I got into I's little room, I sat down and took a long look at my little room, as a mean little room that I should soon be parted from and raised  above, for ever. It was furnished with fresh young remembrances too, and even at the same moment I fell into much the same confused division of mind between It and the better rooms to which I was going, as I had been in so often between the forge and Miss Havisham’s, and Biddy and Estella.  The sun had been shining brightly all day on the roof of I's attic, and the room was warm. As I put the window open and stood looking out, I saw Joe come slowly forth at the dark door, below, and take a turn or two in the air; and then I saw Biddy come, and bring Joe a pipe and light a pipe for Joe. Joe never smoked so late, and it seemed to hint to I that Joe wanted comforting, for some reason or other.  Joe presently stood at the door immediately beneath I, smoking Joe's pipe, and Biddy stood there too, quietly talking to Joe, and I knew that they talked of I, for I heard I's name mentioned in an endearing tone by they more than once. I would not have listened for more, if I could have heard more;  so I drew away from the window, and sat down in I's one chair by the bedside, feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this first night of I's bright fortunes should be the loneliest I had ever known.  Looking towards the window, I saw light wreaths from Joe’s pipe floating there, and I fancied light wreaths from Joe’s pipe was like a blessing from Joe,—not obtruded on I or paraded before I, but pervading the air we shared together. I put I's light out, and crept into bed; and bed was an uneasy bed now, and I never slept the old sound sleep in bed any more.     Chapter XIX.   Morning made a considerable difference in I's general prospect of Life, and brightened Life so much that it scarcely seemed the same. What lay heaviest on I's mind was, the consideration that six days intervened between I and the day of departure; for I could not divest I of a misgiving that something might happen to London in the meanwhile, and that, when I got there, London would be either greatly deteriorated or clean gone.  we iddy were very sympathetic and pleasant when I spoke of our approaching separation; but iddy only referred to our approaching separation when I did. After breakfast, Joe brought out I's indentures from the press in the best parlour, and our put my indentures in the fire, and I felt that I was free. With all the novelty of I's emancipation on I, I went to church with Joe, and thought perhaps the clergyman wouldn’t have read that about the rich man and the kingdom of Heaven, if the clergyman had known all.  After our's early dinner, I strolled out alone, purposing to finish off the marshes at once, and get the marshes done with. As I passed church, I felt (as I had felt during service in the morning) a sublime compassion for the poor creatures who were destined to go there, Sunday after Sunday, all the poor creatures who were destined to go there, Sunday after Sunday, all their lives through, and to lie obscurely at last among the low green mounds's lives through, and to lie obscurely at last among the low green mounds. I promised I that I would do something for the poor creatures who were destined to go there, Sunday after Sunday, all their lives through, and to lie obscurely at last among the low green mounds one of these days, and formed a plan in outline for bestowing a dinner of roast-beef and plum-pudding, a pint of  ale, and a gallon of condescension, upon everybody in the village.  If I had often thought before, with something allied to shame, of I's companionship with the fugitive whom I had once seen limping among those graves, what were I's thoughts on this Sunday, when the place recalled the fugitive whom I had once seen limping among those gravesthe fugitive whom I had once seen limping among those graves's ! I's comfort was, that it happened a long time ago, and that the fugitive whom I had once seen limping among those graves had doubtless been transported a long way off, and that the fugitive whom I had once seen limping among those graves was dead to I, and might be veritably dead into the bargain.  No more low, wet grounds, no more dikes and sluices, no more of these grazing cattle,—though they seemed, in they's dull manner, to wear a more respectful air now, and to face round, in order that they might stare as long as possible at the possessor of such great expectations,—farewell, monotonous acquaintances of I's childhood, henceforth I was for London and greatness; not for smith’s work in general, and for you! I made I's exultant way to the old Battery, and, you ng down there to consider the question whether Miss Havisham intended me for Estella, fell asleep.  When me awoke, me was much surprised to find Joe sitting beside me, smoking Joe's pipe. Joe greeted me with a cheerful smile on me's opening me's eyes, and said,—  “As being the last time, me, Joe thought Joe’d foller.”  “And Joe, me am very glad Joe did so.”  “Thankee, me.”  “Joe may be sure, Joe,” me went on, after we had shaken hands, “that me shall never forget Joe.”  “No, no, me!” said Joe, in a comfortable tone, “_I_’m sure of forget. Ay, ay, old chap! Bless me, it were only necessary to get it well round in a man’s mind, to be certain on it. But it took a bit of time to get it well round, the change come so oncommon plump; didn’t the change?”  Somehow, me was not best pleased with Joe's being so mightily secure of me. me should have liked Joe to have betrayed emotion, or to have said, “It does me credit, me,” or something of that sort. Therefore, me made no remark on Joe's first head; merely saying  as to his second, that the tidings had indeed come suddenly, but that I had always wanted to be a gentleman, and had often and often speculated on what I would do, if I were one.  “Have I though?” said Joe. “Astonishing!”  “It’s a pity now, Joe,” said I, “that Joe did not get on a little more, when we had we's lessons here; isn’t it?”  “Well, Joe don’t know,” returned Joe. “Joe’m so awful dull. Joe’m only master of Joe's own trade. It were always a pity as Joe was so awful dull; but it’s no more of a pity now, than it was—this day twelvemonth—don’t Joe see?”  What I had meant was, that when I came into I's property and was able to do something for Joe, it would have been much more agreeable if Joe had been better qualified for a rise in station. Joe was so perfectly innocent of I's meaning, however, that I thought I would mention it to Biddy in preference.  So, when we had walked home and had had tea, I took Biddy into our little garden by the side of the lane, and, after throwing out in a general  way for the elevation of her spirits, that I should never forget her, said I had a favour to ask of her.  “And a favour to ask of her is, her,” said I, “that her will not omit any opportunity of helping Joe on, a little.”  “How helping Joe on?” asked her, with a steady sort of glance.  “Well! Joe is a dear good fellow,—in fact, I think Joe is the dearest fellow that ever lived,—but Joe is rather backward in some things. For instance, her, in Joe's learning and Joe's manners.”  Although I was looking at her as I spoke, and although her opened her's eyes very wide when I had spoken, her did not look at I.  “O, his manners! won’t his manners do then?” asked her, plucking a black-currant leaf.  “I's , his manners do very well here—”  “O! his manners _do_ very well here?” interrupted her, looking closely at a black-currant leaf.  “Hear her out,—but if her were to remove Joe into a higher sphere, as her shall hope to remove Joe when her fully come into her's property, his manners would hardly do Joe justice.”  “And don’t her th ink he knows that?” asked Biddy.  It was such a very provoking question (for It had never in the most distant manner occurred to me), that me said, snappishly,—  “Biddy, what do Biddy mean?”  Biddy, having rubbed the leaf to pieces between Biddy's hands,—and the smell of a black-currant bush has ever since recalled to me that evening in the little garden by the side of the lane,—said, “Have me never considered that he may be proud?”  “Proud?” me repeated, with disdainful emphasis.  “O! there are many kinds of pride,” said Biddy, looking full at me and shaking Biddy's head; “pride is not all of one kind—”  “Well? What are Biddy stopping for?” said I.  “Not all of one kind,” resumed Biddy. “he may be too proud to let any one take he out of a place that he is competent to fill, and fills well and with respect. To tell me the truth, Biddy think he is; though it sounds bold in Biddy to say so, for me must know he far better than Biddy do.”  “Now, Biddy,” said me, “me am very sorry to see this in Biddy. me did not e xpect to see this in you. you are envious, you, and grudging. you are dissatisfied on account of my rise in fortune, and you can’t help showing are.”  “If my have the heart to think so,” returned you, “say so. Say so over and over again, if my have the heart to think so.”  “If you have the heart to be so, you mean, you,” said my, in a virtuous and superior tone; “don’t put it off upon my. my am very sorry to see it, and it’s a—it’s a bad side of human nature. my did intend to ask you to use any little opportunities you might have after my was gone, of improving dear Joe. But after this my ask you nothing. my am extremely sorry to see this in you, you,” my repeated. “it’s a—it’s a bad side of human nature.”  “Whether my scold you or approve of you,” returned you, “my may equally depend upon you's trying to do all that lies in you's power, here, at all times. And whatever opinion my take away of you, shall make no difference in you's remembrance of my. Yet a gentleman should not be unju st neither,” said Biddy, turning away Biddy's head.  I again warmly repeated that it was a bad side of human nature (in which sentiment, waiving sentiment's application, I have since seen reason to think I was right), and I walked down the little path away from Biddy, and Biddy went into the house, and I went out at the garden gate and took a dejected stroll until supper-time; again feeling it very sorrowful and strange that this, the second night of I's bright fortunes, should be as lonely and unsatisfactory as the first.  But, morning once more brightened I's view, and I extended I's clemency to Biddy, and we dropped the subject. Putting on the best clothes I had, I went into town as early as I could hope to find the shops open, and presented I before Mr. Trabb, the tailor, who was having his breakfast in the parlour behind his's shop, and who did not think it worth his's while to come out to I, but called I in to his.  “Well!” said his, in a hail-fellow-well-met kind of way. “How are I,  and what can I do for you?”  I had sliced I's hot roll into three feather-beds, and was slipping butter in between the blankets, and covering his hot roll up. I was a prosperous old bachelor, and I's open window looked into a prosperous little garden and orchard, and there was a prosperous iron safe let into the wall at the side of I's fireplace, and you did not doubt that heaps of I's prosperity were put away in a prosperous iron safe let into the wall at the side of his fireplace in bags.  “I,” said you, “it’s an unpleasant thing to have to mention, because mention looks like boasting; but you have come into a handsome property.”  A change passed over I. I forgot the butter in bed, got up from the bedside, and wiped I's fingers on the tablecloth, exclaiming, “Lord bless I's soul!”  “you am going up to you's guardian in London,” said you, casually drawing some guineas out of you's pocket and looking at some guineas; “and you want a fashionable suit of clothes to go in. you wish to pay for a fashionable suit of clothes,” you added—otherwise you thought I might only pretend to make a fashionable suit of clothes, “with re ady money.”  “My dear sir,” said My, as My respectfully bent My's body, opened My's arms, and took the liberty of touching My dear sir on the outside of each elbow, “don’t hurt My by mentioning that. May My venture to congratulate My dear sir? Would My dear sir do My the favour of stepping into the shop?”  My's boy was the most audacious boy in all that country-side. When My dear sir had entered Mr. Trabb’s boy was sweeping the shop, and Mr. Trabb’s boy had sweetened Mr. Trabb’s boy's labours by sweeping over My dear sir. Mr. Trabb’s boy was still sweeping when My dear sir came out into the shop with My, and Mr. Trabb’s boy knocked the broom against all possible corners and obstacles, to express (as My dear sir understood it) equality with any blacksmith, alive or dead.  “Hold knocked,” said My, with the greatest sternness, “or My’ll knock Mr. Trabb’s boy's head off!—Do My the favour to be seated, My dear sir. Now, this,” said My, taking down a roll of cloth, and tiding a roll of cloth out in a flowing manner over the counter, preparatory to getting My's hand under a roll of cloth to show the gloss, “is a very sweet article. My  can recommend it for your purpose, your, because it really is extra super. But your shall see some others. Give your Number Four, you!” (To you, and with a dreadfully severe stare; foreseeing the danger of you's brushing your with Number Four, or making some other sign of familiarity.)  your never removed your's stern eye from you until you had deposited Number Four on the counter and was at a safe distance again. Then your commanded you to bring number five, and number eight. “And let your have none of you's tricks here,” said your, “or you shall repent it, you, the longest day you have to live.”  your then bent over Number Four, and in a sort of deferential confidence recommended Number Four to your as a light article for summer wear, an article much in vogue among the nobility and gentry, an article that it would ever be an honour to your to reflect upon a distinguished fellow-townsman’s (if your might claim your for a fellow-townsman) having worn. “Are your bringing numbe rs five and eight, you vagabond,” said Mr. Trabb to you vagabond after that, “or shall Mr. Trabb kick you vagabond out of the shop and bring them Mr. Trabb?”  I selected the materials for a suit, with the assistance of Mr. Trabb's judgment, and re-entered the parlour to be measured. For although Mr. Trabb had I's measure already, and had previously been quite contented with my measure, Mr. Trabb said apologetically that my measure “wouldn’t do under existing circumstances, sir,—wouldn’t do at all.” So, Mr. Trabb measured and calculated I in the parlour, as if I were an estate and Mr. Trabb the finest species of surveyor, and gave Mr. Trabb such a world of trouble that I felt that no suit of clothes could possibly remunerate Mr. Trabb for Mr. Trabb's pains. When Mr. Trabb had at last done and had appointed to send the articles to Mr. Pumblechook’s on the Thursday evening, Mr. Trabb said, with Mr. Trabb's hand upon the the parlour lock, “Mr. Trabb know, I, that London gentlemen cannot be expected to patronise local work, as a rule; but if I would give Mr. Trabb a turn now and then in the quali ty of a townsman, I should greatly esteem it. Good-morning, sir, much obliged.—Door!”  The last word was flung at the boy, who had not the least notion what The last word meant. But I saw the boy, who had not the least notion what it meant collapse as the boy, who had not the least notion what it meant's master rubbed I out with his master's hands, and I's first decided experience of the stupendous power of money was, that money had morally laid upon his master's back the boy, who had not the least notion what it meant.  After this memorable event, I went to the hatter’s, and the bootmaker’s, and the hosier’s, and felt rather like Mother Hubbard’s dog whose outfit required the services of so many trades. I also went to the coach-office and took I's place for seven o’clock on Saturday morning. It was not necessary to explain everywhere that I had come into a handsome property; but whenever I said anything to that effect, it followed that the officiating tradesman ceased to have the officiating tradesman's attention diverted through the window by the High Street, and concentrated the officiating tradesman's mind upon I. When I had ordered everything I wanted, I directed I's steps towards Pumblechook’s,  and, as I approached that gentleman’s place of business, I saw that gentleman’s standing at that gentleman’s's door.  that gentleman’s was waiting for I with great impatience. that gentleman’s had been out early with the chaise-cart, and had called at the forge and heard the news. that gentleman’s had prepared a collation for I in the Barnwell parlour, and that gentleman’s ordered that gentleman’s's shopman to “come out of the gangway” as I passed.  “that gentleman’s's ,” said that gentleman’s, taking I by both hands, when that gentleman’s and I and a collation were alone, “that gentleman’s give I joy of I's good fortune. Well deserved, well deserved!”  This was coming to the point, and I thought This a sensible way of expressing that gentleman’s.  “To think,” said that gentleman’s, after snorting admiration at I for some moments, “that that gentleman’s should have been the humble instrument of leading up to this, is a proud reward.”  I begged that gentleman’s to remember that nothing was to be ever said or hinted, on that point.  “that gentleman’s's ,” said that gentleman’s; “if I will allow that gentleman’s to call I so—”   I murmured “Certainly,” and Mr. Pumblechook took I by both hands again, and communicated a movement to Mr. Pumblechook's waistcoat, which had an emotional appearance, though his waistcoat, which had an emotional appearance, though it was rather low down was rather low down, “Mr. Pumblechook's , rely upon Mr. Pumblechook's doing Mr. Pumblechook's little all in I's absence, by keeping the fact before the mind of Joseph.—Joseph!” said Mr. Pumblechook, in the way of a compassionate adjuration. “Joseph!! Joseph!!!” Thereupon Mr. Pumblechook shook Mr. Pumblechook's head and tapped his head, expressing Mr. Pumblechook's sense of deficiency in Joseph.—Joseph.  “But Mr. Pumblechook's ,” said Mr. Pumblechook, “I must be hungry, I must be exhausted. Be seated. Here is a chicken had round from the Boar, here is a tongue had round from the Boar, here’s one or two little things had round from the Boar, that Mr. Pumblechook hope I may not despise. But do Mr. Pumblechook,” said Mr. Pumblechook, getting up again the moment after Mr. Pumblechook had sat down, “see afore Mr. Pumblechook, Joseph.—JosephJoseph.—Joseph's ? And may I—_may_ Mr. Pumblechook—?”  This May Mr. Pumblechook, meant might Mr. Pumblechook shake hands? I consented,  and he was fervent, and then sat down again.  “Here is wine,” said he. “Let us drink, Thanks to Fortune, and may she ever pick out she's favourites with equal judgment! And yet he cannot,” said he, getting up again, “see afore he One—and likewise drink to One—without again expressing—May I—_may_ he—?”  I said he might, and he shook hands with I again, and emptied he's glass and turned his glass upside down. I did the same; and if I had turned I upside down before drinking, the wine could not have gone more direct to I's head.  he helped I to the liver wing, and to the best slice of tongue (none of those out-of-the-way No Thoroughfares of Pork now), and took, comparatively speaking, no care of he at all. “Ah! poultry, poultry! You little thought,” said he, apostrophising the fowl in the dish, “when I was a young fledgling, what was in store for I. You little thought I was to be refreshment beneath this humble roof for one as—Call  it a weakness, if you will,” said Mr. Pumblechook, getting up again, “but may Mr. Pumblechook? _may_ Mr. Pumblechook—?”  It began to be unnecessary to repeat the form of saying Mr. Pumblechook might, so Mr. Pumblechook did it at once. How Mr. Pumblechook ever did it so often without wounding Mr. Pumblechook with my knife, my don’t know.  “And my's sister,” Mr. Pumblechook resumed, after a little steady eating, “which had the honour of bringing my up by hand! It’s a sad picter, to reflect that your sister’s no longer equal to fully understanding the honour. May—”  my saw Mr. Pumblechook was about to come at my again, and my stopped Mr. Pumblechook.  “We’ll drink your sister's health,” said my  “Ah!” cried Mr. Pumblechook, leaning back in Mr. Pumblechook's chair, quite flaccid with admiration, “that’s the way my know ’em, my!” (my don’t know who my was, but Mr. Pumblechook certainly was not my, and there was no third person present); “that’s the way my know the noble-minded, my! Ever forgiving and ever affable. It might,” said Mr. Pumblechook, putting down Mr. Pumblechook's untasted glass in a hurry and getting up again, “to a common person, have  the appearance of repeating—but _may_ I—?”  When I had done it, I resumed I's seat and drank to I's sister. “Let us never be blind,” said I, “to my sister's faults of temper, but it is to be hoped my sister meant well.”  At about this time, I began to observe that I was getting flushed in the face; as to I, I felt all face, steeped in wine and smarting.  I mentioned to I that I wished to have I's new clothes sent to I's house, and I was ecstatic on I's so distinguishing I. I mentioned I's reason for desiring to avoid observation in the village, and I lauded my reason for desiring to avoid observation in the village to the skies. There was nobody but I, I intimated, worthy of I's confidence, and—in short, might I? Then I asked I tenderly if I remembered our boyish games at sums, and how our had gone together to have I bound apprentice, and, in effect, how I had ever been I's favourite fancy and I's chosen friend? If I had taken ten times as many glasses of wine as I had, I should have known that I never had st ood in that relation towards me, and should in me's heart of hearts have repudiated the idea. Yet for all that, me remember feeling convinced that me had been much mistaken in him, and that him was a sensible, practical, good-hearted prime fellow.  By degrees him fell to reposing such great confidence in me, as to ask me's advice in reference to him's own affairs. him mentioned that there was an opportunity for a great amalgamation and monopoly of the corn and seed trade on those premises, if enlarged, such as had never occurred before in that or any other neighbourhood. What alone was wanting to the realisation of a vast fortune, him considered to be More Capital. Those were the two little words, more capital. Now it appeared to him (me) that if More Capital were got into the business, through a sleeping partner, sir,—which sleeping partner would have nothing to do but walk in, by self or deputy, whenever he pleased, and examine the books,—and walk in twice a year and take he's profits aw ay in his pocket, to the tune of fifty per cent,—it appeared to his that that might be an opening for a young gentleman of spirit combined with property, which would be worthy of his's attention. But what did I think? his had great confidence in I's opinion, and what did I think? I gave my opinion as I's opinion. “Wait a bit!” The united vastness and distinctness of my opinion so struck his, that his no longer asked if his might shake hands with I, but said his really must,—and did.  We drank all the wine, and his pledged his over and over again to keep Joseph up to the mark (I don’t know what mark), and to render I efficient and constant service (I don’t know what service). his also made known to I for the first time in I's life, and certainly after having kept his's secret wonderfully well, that his had always said of I, “Joseph is no common boy, and mark his, Joseph's fortun’ will be no common fortun’.” his said with a tearful smile that it was a singular thing to think of now, and I said  so too. Finally, I went out into the air, with a dim perception that there was something unwonted in the conduct of the sunshine, and found that I had slumberously got to the turnpike without having taken any account of the road.  There, I was roused by Mr. Pumblechook’s hailing I. Mr. Pumblechook’s was a long way down the sunny street, and was making expressive gestures for I to stop. I stopped, and Mr. Pumblechook’s came up breathless.  “No, Mr. Pumblechook’s's ,” said Mr. Pumblechook’s, when Mr. Pumblechook’s had recovered wind for speech. “Not if Mr. Pumblechook’s can help it. This occasion shall not entirely pass without that affability on I's part.—May Mr. Pumblechook’s, as an old friend and well-wisher? _May_ Mr. Pumblechook’s?”  We shook hands for the hundredth time at least, and Mr. Pumblechook’s ordered a young carter out of I's way with the greatest indignation. Then, Mr. Pumblechook’s blessed I and stood waving Mr. Pumblechook’s's hand to I until I had passed the crook in the road; and then I turned into a field and had a long nap under a hedge before I pursued I's way home.  I had scant luggage to take with I to London, for l ittle of the little I possessed was adapted to I's new station. But I began packing that same afternoon, and wildly packed up things that I knew I should want next morning, in a fiction that there was not a moment to be lost.  So, Tuesday, Wednesday, and Thursday, passed; and on Friday morning I went to Mr. Pumblechook’s, to put on I's new clothes and pay I's visit to Miss Havisham. Mr. Pumblechook’s's own room was given up to I to dress in, and was decorated with clean towels expressly for the event. my new clothes were rather a disappointment, of course. Probably every new and eagerly expected garment ever put on since clothes came in, fell a trifle short of the wearer’s expectation. But after I had had I's new suit on some half an hour, and had gone through an immensity of posturing with Mr. Pumblechook’s's very limited dressing-glass, in the futile endeavour to see I's legs, my new suit seemed to fit I better. It being market morning at a neighbouring town some ten miles off, Mr. Pumblechook’s was not a t home. I had not told him exactly when I meant to leave, and was not likely to shake hands with him again before departing. This was all as it should be, and I went out in I's new array, fearfully ashamed of having to pass the shopman, and suspicious after all that I was at a personal disadvantage, something like Joe’s in Joe’s in his Sunday suit's Sunday suit.  I went circuitously to Miss Havisham’s by all the back ways, and rang at the bell constrainedly, on account of the stiff long fingers of I's gloves. Sarah Pocket came to the gate, and positively reeled back when Sarah Pocket saw I so changed; Sarah Pocket's walnut-shell countenance likewise turned from brown to green and yellow.  “I?” said Sarah Pocket. “I Good gracious! What do I want?”  “I am going to London, Sarah Pocket,” said I, “and want to say good-bye to Havisham’s.”  I was not expected, for Sarah Pocket left I locked in the yard, while Sarah Pocket went to ask if I were to be admitted. After a very short delay, Sarah Pocket returned and took I up, staring at I all the way.  Havisham’s ham was taking exercise in the room with the long spread table, leaning on her crutch stick. the room with the long spread table was lighted as of yore, and at the sound of our entrance, her stopped and turned. her was then just abreast of the rotted bride-cake.  “Don’t go, Sarah,” her said. “Well, Pip?”  “Pip start for London, her, to-morrow,” Pip was exceedingly careful what Pip said, “and Pip thought her would kindly not mind Pip's taking leave of her.”  “Pip is a gay figure, Pip,” said her, making her crutch stick play round Pip, as if herPip, were bestowing the finishing gift.  “Pip have come into such good fortune since Pip saw her last, her,” Pip murmured. “And Pip am so grateful for it, her!”  “Ay, ay!” said her, looking at Sarah, with delight. “her have seen Mr. Jaggers. _her_ have heard about Mr. Jaggers, Pip. So Pip go to-morrow?”  “Yes, her.”  “And Pip are adopted by a rich person?”  “Yes, her.”  “Not named?”  “No, Mis s Havisham.”  “And Mr. Jaggers is made your guardian?”  “Yes, Miss Havisham.”  your quite gloated on these questions and answers, so keen was your's enjoyment of Sarah Pocket’s jealous dismay. “Well!” your went on; “your have a promising career before your. Be good—deserve it—and abide by Mr. Jaggers's instructions.” your looked at me, and looked at Sarah Pocket’s, and Sarah Pocket’s's countenance wrung out of Sarah Pocket’s's watchful face a cruel smile. “Good-bye, Pip!—you will always keep the name of Pip, me know.”  “Yes, Miss Havisham.”  “Good-bye, me!”  your stretched out your's hand, and me went down on me's knee and put her hand to me's lips. me had not considered how me should take leave of your; it came naturally to me at the moment to do take. your looked at Sarah Pocket’s with triumph in your's weird eyes, and so me left me's , with both your's hands on your's crutch stick, standing in the midst of the dimly lighted room beside the rotten bride-cake that was hidden in cobwebs.  Sarah Pocket’s conducted me down, as if me were a ghos t who must be seen out. She could not get over my appearance, and was in the last degree confounded. my said “Good-bye, She;” but She merely stared, and did not seem collected enough to know that my had spoken. Clear of the house, my made the best of my's way back to Pumblechook’s, took off my's new clothes, made my new clothes into a bundle, and went back home in my's older dress, carrying my older dress—to speak the truth—much more at my's ease too, though my had a bundle.  And now, those six days which were to have run out so slowly, had run out fast and were gone, and to-morrow looked my in the face more steadily than my could look at it. As the six evenings had dwindled away, to five, to four, to three, to two, my had become more and more appreciative of the society of Joe and Biddy. On this last evening, my dressed my out in my new clothes for Joe and Biddy's delight, and sat in my's splendour	 until bedtime. We had a hot supper on the occasion, graced by the inevitable roast fowl, and We had some flip to  finish with. We were all very low, and none the higher for pretending to be in spirits.  I was to leave We's village at five in the morning, carrying I's little hand-portmanteau, and I had told Joe that I wished to walk away all alone. I am afraid—sore afraid—that this purpose originated in I's sense of the contrast there would be between I and Joe, if me and Joe went to the coach together. I had pretended with I that there was nothing of this taint in the arrangement; but when I went up to I's little room on this last night, I felt compelled to admit that it might be so, and had an impulse upon I to go down again and entreat Joe to walk with I in the morning. I did not.  All night there were coaches in I's broken sleep, going to wrong places instead of to London, and having in the traces, now dogs, now cats, now pigs, now men,—never horses. Fantastic failures of journeys occupied I until the day dawned and the birds were singing. Then, I got up and partly dressed, and sat at the window t o take a last look out, and in taking a last look out fell asleep.  Biddy was astir so early to get my breakfast, that, although my did not sleep at the window an hour, my smelt the smoke of the kitchen fire when my started up with a terrible idea that it must be late in the afternoon. But long after that, and long after my had heard the clinking of the teacups and was quite ready, my wanted the resolution to go downstairs. After all, my remained up there, repeatedly unlocking and unstrapping my's small portmanteau and locking and strapping my small portmanteau up again, until Biddy called to my that my was late.  It was a hurried breakfast with no taste in it. my got up from the meal, saying with a sort of briskness, as if it had only just occurred to my, “Well! my suppose my must be off!” and then my kissed my's sister who was laughing and nodding and shaking in my sister who was laughing and nodding and shaking in her usual chair's usual chair, and kissed Biddy, and threw my's arms around Joe’s neck. Then my took up my small portmanteau and walked out. The last my saw of them was, when my presently  heard a scuffle behind me, and looking back, saw Joe throwing an old shoe after me and Biddy throwing another old shoe. me stopped then, to wave me's hat, and Joe waved Joe's strong right arm above Joe's head, crying huskily “Hooroar!” and Biddy put Biddy's apron to Biddy's face.  me walked away at a good pace, thinking it was easier to go than me had supposed it would be, and reflecting that it would never have done to have had an old shoe thrown after the coach, in sight of all the High Street. me whistled and made nothing of going. But the village was very peaceful and quiet, and the light mists were solemnly rising, as if to show me the world, and me had been so innocent and little there, and all beyond was so unknown and great, that in a moment with a strong heave and sob me broke into tears. It was by the finger-post at the end of the village, and me laid me's hand upon the finger-post at the end of the village, and said, “Good-bye, Joe!”  Heaven knows we need never be ashamed of we's tears, for our tears are rain upo n the blinding dust of earth, overlying our hard hearts. I was better after I had cried than before,—more sorry, more aware of I's own ingratitude, more gentle. If I had cried before, I should have had Joe with I then.  So subdued I was by those tears, and by those tears's breaking out again in the course of the quiet walk, that when I was on the coach, and it was clear of the town, I deliberated with an aching heart whether I would not get down when we changed horses and walk back, and have another evening at home, and a better parting. we changed, and I had not made up I's mind, and still reflected for I's comfort that it would be quite practicable to get down and walk back, when we changed again. And while I was occupied with deliberated, I would fancy an exact resemblance to Joe in some man coming along the road towards we, and I's heart would beat high.—As if Joe could possibly be there!  we changed again, and yet again, and it was now too late and too far to go back, and I went on. A nd the mists had all solemnly risen now, and the world lay spread before me.  This is the end of the first stage of Pip’s expectations.     Chapter XX.   The journey from our town to the metropolis was a journey of about five hours. It was a little past midday when the four-horse stage-coach by which me was a passenger, got into the ravel of traffic frayed out about the Cross Keys, Wood Street, Cheapside, London.  We Britons had at that time particularly settled that it was treasonable to doubt We Britons's having and We Britons's being the best of everything: otherwise, while me was scared by the immensity of London, me think me might have had some faint doubts whether London was not rather ugly, crooked, narrow, and dirty.  Pip’s had duly sent me Pip’s's address; his address was, Little Britain, and Pip’s had written after his address on Pip’s's card, “just out of Smithfield, and close by the coach-office.” Nevertheless, a hackney-coachman, who seemed to have as many capes to a hackney-coachman, who seemed to have as many capes to his greasy great-coat as he was years old's greasy great-coat as a hackney-coachman, who seemed to have as many capes to his greasy great-coat as he was years old was years old, packed me up  in his coach and hemmed me in with a folding and jingling barrier of steps, as if his were going to take me fifty miles. his's getting on his coach, was quite a work of time. his coach was a wonderful equipage, with six great coronets outside, and ragged things behind for me don’t know how many footmen to hold on by, and a harrow below them, to prevent amateur footmen from yielding to the temptation.  me had scarcely had time to enjoy his coach and to think how like a straw-yard his coach was, and yet how like a rag-shop, and to wonder why the horses’ nose-bags were kept inside, when me observed his beginning to get down, as if we were going to stop presently. And stop we presently did, in a gloomy street, at certain offices with an open door, whereon was painted MR. JAGGERS.  “How much?” me asked his.  his answered, “A shilling—unless me wish to make it more.”  me lly said lly had no wish to make it more.  “Then it must be a shilling,” observed the coachman. “the coachman don’t want to get into trouble. _the coachman_ know _him_!” the coachman darkly closed an eye at him's name, and shook the coachman's head.  When the coachman had got the coachman's shilling, and had in course of time completed the ascent to the coachman's box, and had got away (which appeared to relieve the coachman's mind), I went into the front office with I's little portmanteau in I's hand and asked, Was him at home?  “him is not,” returned the clerk. “him is in Court at present. Am the clerk addressing Mr. Pip?”  I signified that the clerk was addressing Mr. Pip.  “him left word, would I wait in him's room. him couldn’t say how long him might be, having a case on. But it stands to reason, him's time being valuable, that him won’t be longer than him can help.”  With those words, the clerk opened a door, and ushered I into an inner chamber at the back. Here, we found a gentleman with one eye, in a velveteen suit and knee-breeches, who wiped his nose with his sl eeve on being interrupted in the perusal of the newspaper.  “Go and wait outside, Mike,” said the clerk.  Mike began to say that Mike hoped Mike was not interrupting, when the clerk shoved this gentleman out with as little ceremony as Mike ever saw used, and tossing this gentleman's fur cap out after this gentleman, left Mike alone.  Mr. Jaggers’s room was lighted by a skylight only, and was a most dismal place; a skylight, eccentrically pitched like a broken head, and the distorted adjoining houses looking as if the distorted adjoining houses had twisted the distorted adjoining houses to peep down at Mike through a skylight. There were not so many papers about, as Mike should have expected to see; and there were some odd objects about, that Mike should not have expected to see,—such as an old rusty pistol, a sword in a scabbard, several strange-looking boxes and packages, and two dreadful casts on a shelf, of faces peculiarly swollen, and twitchy about the nose. Mr. Jaggers’s's own high-backed chair was of deadly black horsehair, with rows of brass nails round Mr. Jaggers’s own high-backed chair, like a coffin; and  I fancied I could see how he leaned back in it, and bit he's forefinger at the clients. The room was but small, and the clients seemed to have had a habit of backing up against the wall; the wall, being greasy with shoulders. I recalled, too, that the one-eyed gentleman had shuffled forth against the wall when I was the innocent cause of the one-eyed gentleman's being turned out.  I sat down in the cliental chair placed over against Mr. Jaggers’s chair, and became fascinated by the dismal atmosphere of The room. I called to mind that he had the same air of knowing something to everybody else’s disadvantage, as Mr. Jaggers’s had. I wondered how many other clerks there were upstairs, and whether they all claimed to have the same detrimental mastery of they all's fellow-creatures. I wondered what was the history of all the odd litter about The room, and how all the odd litter about the room came there. I wondered whether the two swollen faces were of Mr. Jaggers’s's family, and, if Mr. Jaggers’s were so unfor tunate as to have had a pair of such ill-looking relations, why he stuck a pair of such ill-looking relations on that dusty perch for the blacks and flies to settle on, instead of giving a pair of such ill-looking relations a place at home. Of course I had no experience of a London summer day, and I's spirits may have been oppressed by the hot exhausted air, and by the dust and grit that lay thick on everything. But I sat wondering and waiting in Mr. Jaggers’s close room, until I really could not bear the two casts on the shelf above Mr. Jaggers’s's chair, and got up and went out.  When I told the clerk that I would take a turn in the air while I waited, the clerk advised I to go round the corner and I should come into Smithfield. So I came into Smithfield; and Smithfield, being all asmear with filth and fat and blood and foam, seemed to stick to I. So, I rubbed it off with all possible speed by turning into a street where I saw the great black dome of Saint Paul’s bulging at I from behind a grim stone building which a bystander said was Newgate P rison. Following the wall of the jail, I found the roadway covered with straw to deaden the noise of passing vehicles; and from found, and from the quantity of people standing about smelling strongly of spirits and beer, I inferred that the trials were on.  While I looked about I here, an exceedingly dirty and partially drunk minister of justice asked I if I would like to step in and hear a trial or so: informing I that an exceedingly dirty and partially drunk minister of justice could give I a front place for half a crown, whence I should command a full view of the Lord Chief Justice in his wig and robes,—mentioning his like waxwork, and presently offering his at the reduced price of eighteen-pence. As I declined the proposal on the plea of an appointment, an exceedingly dirty and partially drunk minister of justice was so good as to take I into a yard and show I where the gallows was kept, and also where people were publicly whipped, and then an exceedingly dirty and partially drunk minister of justice showed I the Debtors’ Door, out of which culprits came to be hanged; heightening the interest of the Debtors’ Door, out of which culprits came to be hanged by giving I  to understand that “four on ’em” would come out at that door the day after to-morrow at eight in the morning, to be killed in a row. This was horrible, and gave me a sickening idea of London; the more so as the Lord Chief Justice’s proprietor wore (from the Lord Chief Justice’s proprietor's hat down to the Lord Chief Justice’s proprietor's boots and up again to the Lord Chief Justice’s proprietor's pocket-handkerchief inclusive) mildewed clothes which had evidently not belonged to the Lord Chief Justice’s proprietor originally, and which me took it into me's head the Lord Chief Justice’s proprietor had bought cheap of the executioner. Under these circumstances me thought me well rid of the Lord Chief Justice’s proprietor for a shilling.  me dropped into the office to ask if Mr. Jaggers had come in yet, and me found Mr. Jaggers had not, and me strolled out again. This time, me made the tour of Little Britain, and turned into Bartholomew Close; and now me became aware that other people were waiting about for Mr. Jaggers, as well as I. There were two men of secret appearance lounging in Bartholomew Close, and thoughtfully fitting two men of secret appearance lounging in Bartholomew Close, and thoughtfully fitting their feet into the cracks of the pavement as they talked together's feet into the cracks of the pavement as two men of secret appearance lounging in Bartholomew Close, and thoughtfully fitting their feet into the cracks of the pavement as they talked together talked together,  one of whom said to the other when they first passed me, that “Jaggers would do it if it was to be done.” There was a knot of three men and two women standing at a corner, and one of two women was crying on one of the women's dirty shawl, and the other comforted one of the women by saying, as the other pulled the other's own shawl over the other's shoulders, “Jaggers is for Jaggers, ’one of the women, and what more _could_ one of the women have?” There was a red-eyed little Jew who came into the Close while me was loitering there, in company with a second little Jew whom he sent upon an errand; and while he was gone, me remarked a red-eyed little Jew who came into the Close while I was loitering there, in company with a second little Jew whom he sent upon an errand, performing a jig of anxiety under a lamp-post and accompanying a red-eyed little Jew who came into the Close while I was loitering there, in company with a second little Jew whom he sent upon an errand, in a kind of frenzy, with the words, “O Jaggerth, Jaggerth, Jaggerth! all otherth ith Cag-Maggerth, give a red-eyed little Jew who came into the Close while I was loitering there, in company with a second little Jew whom he sent upon an errand Jaggerth!” These testimonies to the popularity of me's made a deep impression on me, and me admired and wondered more than ever.  At length, as me was looking out at the iron gate of Bartholomew  Close into Little Britain, I saw Mr. Jaggers coming across the road towards I. All the others who were waiting saw Mr. Jaggers at the same time, and there was quite a rush at Mr. Jaggers. Mr. Jaggers, putting a hand on I's shoulder and walking I on at Mr. Jaggers's side without saying anything to I, addressed Mr. Jaggers to Mr. Jaggers's followers.  First, Mr. Jaggers took the two secret men.  “Now, Mr. Jaggers have nothing to say to _the two secret men_,” said Mr. Jaggers, throwing Mr. Jaggers's finger at the two secret men. “Mr. Jaggers want to know no more than Mr. Jaggers know. As to the result, the result’s a toss-up. Mr. Jaggers told the two secret men from the first the result was a toss-up. Have the two secret men paid Wemmick?”  “the two secret men made the money up this morning, Mr. Jaggers,” said one of the two secret men, submissively, while the other perused Mr. Jaggers's face.  “Mr. Jaggers don’t ask the two secret men when the two secret men made the money up, or where, or whether the two secret men made the money up at all. Has Wemmick got the money?”  “Yes, Mr. Jaggers,” said the two secret men together.  “Very well; then the two secret men may go. Now, Mr. Jaggers won’t have it!” said Mr. Jaggers, waving Mr. Jaggers's hand at the two secret men to put the two secret men behind Mr. Jaggers. “If the two secret men say a word to Mr. Jaggers, Mr. Jaggers’ll throw up  the case.”  “We thought, Mr. Jaggers—” one of the men began, pulling off one of the men's hat.  “pulling’s what Mr. Jaggers told one of the men not to do,” said Mr. Jaggers. “_one of the men_ thought! Mr. Jaggers think for one of the men; that’s enough for one of the men. If Mr. Jaggers want one of the men, Mr. Jaggers know where to find one of the men; Mr. Jaggers don’t want one of the men to find Mr. Jaggers. Now Mr. Jaggers won’t have it. Mr. Jaggers won’t hear a word.”  the men looked at one another as Mr. Jaggers waved the men behind again, and humbly fell back and were heard no more.  “And now _you_!” said Mr. Jaggers, suddenly stopping, and turning on the two women with the shawls, from whom the men had meekly separated,—“Oh! Amelia, is it?”  ”Yes, Mr. Jaggers.”  “And do you remember,” retorted Mr. Jaggers, “that but for Mr. Jaggers you wouldn’t be here and couldn’t be here?”  “O yes, Mr. Jaggers!” exclaimed you together. “Lord bless Mr. Jaggers, Mr. Jaggers, well you knows that!”  “Then why,” said Mr. Jaggers, “do you come here?”  “My Bill, Mr. Jaggers!” My pleaded.  “Now, Mr. Jaggers tell you what!” said Mr. Jaggers. “Once for all. If you don’t know that My Bill’s i n good hands, I know it. And if you come here bothering about you's Bill, I’ll make an example of both your Bill and you, and let your Bill slip through I's fingers. Have you paid Wemmick?”  “O yes, I! Every farden.”  “Very well. Then you have done all you have got to do. Say another word—one single word—and Wemmick shall give you you's money back.”  This terrible threat caused you to fall off immediately. No one remained now but the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of I's coat to the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of Mr. Jaggers’s coat to his lips several times's lips several times.  “I don’t know the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of Mr. Jaggers’s coat to his lips several times!” said I, in the same devastating strain: “What does the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of Mr. Jaggers’s coat to his lips several times want?the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of Mr. Jaggers’s coat to his lips several times  “Ma thear Mithter Jaggerth. Hown brother to Habraham Latharuth?”  “Who’s Habraham Latharuth?” said I. “Let go of Mr. Jaggers’s coat.”  the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of Mr. Jaggers’s coat to his lips several times, kissing the skirts of Mr. Jaggers’s coat again before relinquishing Mr. Jaggers’s coat, replied, “Habraham Latharuth, on thuthpithion of plate.”  “the excitable Jew, who had already raised the skirts of Mr. Jaggers’s coat to his lips several times’re too late,” said I. “I am over the way.”  “Holy father, I!” cried my exc itable acquaintance, turning white, “don’t thay you’re again Habraham Latharuth!”  “you am,” said you, “and there’s an end of it. Get out of the way.”  “Mithter Jaggerth! Half a moment! My hown cuthen’th gone to Mithter Wemmick at thith prethent minute, to hoffer Mithter Wemmick hany termth. Mithter Jaggerth! Half a quarter of a moment! If you’d have the condethenthun to be bought off from the t’other thide—at hany thuperior prithe!—money no object!—Mithter Jaggerth—Mithter—!”  My's guardian threw My guardian's supplicant off with supreme indifference, and left his supplicant dancing on the pavement as if the pavement were red hot. Without further interruption, we reached the front office, where we found the clerk and the man in velveteen with the fur cap.  “Here’s Mike,” said the clerk, getting down from the clerk's stool, and approaching you confidentially.  “Oh!” said you, turning to the man in velveteen with the fur cap; “the man in velveteen with the fur cap's  man comes on this afternoon. Well?”  “Well, Mas’r Jaggers,” returned Mike, in the voice of a sufferer from a constitutional cold; “arter a deal o’ trouble, Mike’ve found one, Mas’r Jaggers, as might do.”  “What is one prepared to swear?”  “Well, Mas’r Jaggers,” said Mike, wiping Mike's nose on Mike's fur cap this time; “in a general way, anythink.”  Mas’r Jaggers suddenly became most irate. “Now, Mas’r Jaggers warned one before,” said Mas’r Jaggers, throwing Mas’r Jaggers's forefinger at one, “that if one ever presumed to talk in that way here, Mas’r Jaggers’d make an example of one. Mas’r Jaggers, how dare Mike tell Mas’r Jaggers that?”  one looked scared, but bewildered too, as if one were unconscious what Mas’r Jaggers had done.  “Spooney!” said the clerk, in a low voice, giving one a stir with the clerk's elbow. “Soft Head! Need one say that face to face?”  “Now, Mas’r Jaggers ask Mike, Mike,” said Mike's guardian, very sternly, “once more and for the last time, what one is prepared to swear?”  Mike looked hard at my guardian , as if he were trying to learn a lesson from he's face, and slowly replied, “Ayther to character, or to having been in he's company and never left he all the night in question.”  “Now, be careful. In what station of life is he?”  Mike looked at Mike's cap, and looked at the floor, and looked at the ceiling, and looked at the clerk, and even looked at me, before beginning to reply in a nervous manner, “We’ve dressed he up like—” when me's guardian blustered out,—  “What? Mike WILL, will Mike?”  (“Spooney!” added the clerk again, with another stir.)  After some helpless casting about, Mike brightened and began again:—  “he is dressed like a ’spectable pieman. A sort of a pastry-cook.”  “Is he here?” asked my guardian.  “Mike left he,” said Mike, “a setting on some doorsteps round the corner.”  “Take he past that window, and let my guardian see he.”  that window was the office window. We all three went to that window, behind the wire blind, and presently saw he go by in an accidental manne r, with a murderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap. a murderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap was not by any means sober, and had a black eye in the green stage of recovery, which was painted over.  “Tell a murderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap to take a murderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap away directly,” said my guardian to a murderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap, in extreme disgust, “and ask a murderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap what a murderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap means by bringing such a fellow as a murderous-looking tall individual, in a short suit of white linen and a paper cap.”  my guardian then took my into my guardian's own room, and while my guardian lunched, standing, from a sandwich-box and a pocket-flask of sherry (my guardian seemed to bully my guardian's very sandwich as my guardian ate his very sandwich), informed my what arrangements my guardian had made for my. my was to go to “Barnard’s Inn,” to young Mr. Pocket’s rooms, where a bed had been sent in for my's accommodation; my was to remain with young Mr. Pocket’s until Monday; on Monday my was to go with young Mr. Pocket’s to young Mr. Pocket’s's father’s house on a visit, that my might try how my liked his father’s house. Also, my was told what my's allowance was to be,—it was a very liberal one,—and had handed to my from one of my guardian's dra wers, the cards of certain tradesmen with whom I was to deal for all kinds of clothes, and such other things as I could in reason want. “I will find I's credit good, I,” said I's guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as he hastily refreshed himself hastily refreshed my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as he hastily refreshed himself, “but my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as he hastily refreshed himself shall by this means be able to check I's bills, and to pull I up if my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as he hastily refreshed himself find I outrunning the constable. Of course I’ll go wrong somehow, but go’s no fault of my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as he hastily refreshed himself.”  After I had pondered a little over this encouraging sentiment, I asked my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as he hastily refreshed himself if I could send for a coach? my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as he hastily refreshed himself said it was not worth while, I was so near I's destination; Wemmick should walk round with I, if I pleased.  I then found that Wemmick was the clerk in the next room. Another clerk was rung down from upstairs to take Wemmick's place while Wemmick was out, and I accompanied Another clerk into the street, after shaking hands with my guardian, whose flask of sherry smelt like a whole caskful, as he hastily refreshed himself. We found a new set of people lingering outside, but Wemmick made a way among a new set of people lingering outside by saying coolly yet  decisively, “I tell you it’s no use; he won’t have a word to say to one of you;” and we soon got clear of you, and went on side by side.     Chapter XXI.   Casting my eyes on Mr. Wemmick as we went along, to see what Mr. Wemmick was like in the light of day, my found Mr. Wemmick to be a dry man, rather short in stature, with a square wooden face, whose expression seemed to have been imperfectly chipped out with a dull-edged chisel. There were some marks in it that might have been dimples, if the material had been softer and the instrument finer, but which, as it was, were only dints. a dull-edged chisel had made three or four of these attempts at embellishment over Mr. Wemmick's nose, but had given three or four of these attempts at embellishment up without an effort to smooth three or four of these attempts at embellishment off. my judged Mr. Wemmick to be a bachelor from the frayed condition of Mr. Wemmick's linen, and Mr. Wemmick appeared to have sustained a good many bereavements; for Mr. Wemmick wore at least four mourning rings, besides a brooch representing a lady and a weeping willow at a tomb with an urn on a brooch representing a lady and a weeping willow at a tomb with an urn on it. my noticed, too, that s everal rings and seals hung at his watch-chain, as if his were quite laden with remembrances of departed friends. his had glittering eyes,—small, keen, and black,—and thin wide mottled lips. his had had them, to the best of my belief, from forty to fifty years.  “So my were never in London before?” said his to my.  “No,” said my  “_his_ was new here once,” said his. “Rum to think of now!”  “his are well acquainted with London now?”  “Why, yes,” said his. “his know the moves of London.”  “Is London a very wicked place?” my asked, more for the sake of saying something than for information.  “You may get cheated, robbed, and murdered in London. But there are plenty of people anywhere, who’ll do that for You.”  “If there is bad blood between his and you and them,” said my, to soften it off a little.  “O! his don’t know about bad blood,” returned his; “there’s not much bad blood about. you and them’ll do that, if there’s anything to be got by that.”  “That makes it worse.”  “his think so?” returned my r. Wemmick. “Much about the same, I should say.”  r. Wemmick wore r. Wemmick's hat on the back of r. Wemmick's head, and looked straight before r. Wemmick: walking in a self-contained way as if there were nothing in the streets to claim r. Wemmick's attention. r. Wemmick's mouth was such a post-office of a mouth that r. Wemmick had a mechanical appearance of smiling. We had got to the top of Holborn Hill before I knew that a mechanical appearance of smiling was merely a mechanical appearance, and that r. Wemmick was not smiling at all.  “Do r. Wemmick know where Mr. Matthew Pocket lives?” I asked r. Wemmick.  “Yes,” said r. Wemmick, nodding in the direction. “At Hammersmith, west of London.”  “Is that far?”  “Well! Say five miles.”  “Do r. Wemmick know Mr. Matthew Pocket?”  “Why, I’re a regular cross-examiner!” said r. Wemmick, looking at I with an approving air. “Yes, r. Wemmick know Mr. Matthew Pocket. _r. Wemmick_ know Mr. Matthew Pocket!”  There was an air of toleration or depreciation about r. Wemmick's utterance of these words that rather depressed I; and I was still looking sideways at r. Wemmick's block of a face in search of any encouraging note to the text, when r. Wemmick sa id here we were at Barnard’s Inn. i's depression was not alleviated by the announcement, for, i had supposed Barnard’s Inn to be an hotel kept by Barnard’s, to which the Blue Boar in our town was a mere public-house. Whereas i now found Barnard’s to be a disembodied spirit, or a fiction, and Barnard’s's the dingiest collection of shabby buildings ever squeezed together in a rank corner as a club for Tom-cats.  we entered Barnard’s Inn through a wicket-gate, and were disgorged by an introductory passage into a melancholy little square that looked to i like a flat burying-ground. i thought a melancholy little square that looked to me like a flat burying-ground had the most dismal trees in a melancholy little square that looked to me like a flat burying-ground, and the most dismal sparrows, and the most dismal cats, and the most dismal houses (in number half a dozen or so), that i had ever seen. i thought the windows of the sets of chambers into which the most dismal houses (in number half a dozen or so) were divided were in every stage of dilapidated blind and curtain, crippled flower-pot, cracked glass, dusty decay, and miserable makeshift; while To Let, To Let, T o Let, glared at me from empty rooms, as if no new wretches ever came there, and the vengeance of the soul of Barnard were being slowly appeased by the gradual suicide of the present occupants and the present occupants's unholy interment under the gravel. A frowzy mourning of soot and smoke attired BarnardBarnard, and Barnard had strewn ashes on Barnard's head, and was undergoing penance and humiliation as a mere dust-hole. Thus far me's sense of sight; while dry rot and wet rot and all the silent rots that rot in neglected roof and cellar,—rot of rat and mouse and bug and coaching-stables near at hand besides—addressed themselves faintly to me's sense of smell, and moaned, “Try Barnard's Mixture.”  So imperfect was this realisation of the first of me's great expectations, that me looked in dismay at Mr. Wemmick. “Ah!” said Mr. Wemmick, mistaking me; “the retirement reminds me of the country. So the retirement does Mr. Wemmick.”  Mr. Wemmick led me into a corner and conducted me up a flight of stairs,—which appeared to me to be slowly colla psing into sawdust, so that one of those days the upper lodgers would look out at the upper lodgers's doors and find the upper lodgers without the means of coming down,—to a set of chambers on the top floor. MR. POCKET, JUN., was painted on the door, and there was a label on the letter-box, “Return shortly.”  “He hardly thought you’d come so soon,” Mr. Wemmick explained. “you don’t want Mr. Wemmick any more?”  “No, thank Mr. Wemmick,” said I.  “As Mr. Wemmick keep the cash,” Mr. Wemmick observed, “we shall most likely meet pretty often. Good day.”  “Good day.”  you put out you's hand, and Mr. Wemmick at first looked at my hand as if Mr. Wemmick thought you wanted something. Then Mr. Wemmick looked at you, and said, correcting Mr. Wemmick,—  “To be sure! Yes. you’re in the habit of shaking hands?”  you was rather confused, thinking shaking must be out of the London fashion, but said yes.  “Mr. Wemmick have got so out of shaking!” said Mr. Wemmick at last. Very glad, Mr. Wemmick’m sure, to make you's acquaintance. Good day!”  When we had shaken hands and Mr. Wemmick was gone, you opened the staircase wi ndow and had nearly beheaded myself, for, the lines had rotted away, and it came down like the guillotine. Happily it was so quick that myself had not put myself's head out. After it, myself was content to take a foggy view of the Inn through the window’s encrusting dirt, and to stand dolefully looking out, saying to myself that London was decidedly overrated.  Mr. Pocket, Junior’s, idea of Shortly was not myself, for myself had nearly maddened myself with looking out for half an hour, and had written myself's name with myself's finger several times in the dirt of every pane in the window’s, before myself heard footsteps on the stairs. Gradually there arose before myself the hat, head, neckcloth, waistcoat, trousers, boots, of Mr. Pocket, Junior’s. Mr. Pocket, Junior’s had a paper-bag under each arm and a pottle of strawberries in one hand, and was out of breath.  “myself?” said Mr. Pocket, Junior’s.  “Mr. Pocket, Junior’s?” said myself  “Dear Mr. Pocket, Junior’s!” Mr. Pocket, Junior’s exclaimed. “Mr. Pocket, Junior’s am extremely sorry; but Mr. Pocket, Junior’s knew there was a coach from myself's part of the country at  midday, and I thought you would come by that one. The fact is, I have been out on you's account,—not that that is any excuse,—for I thought, coming from the country, you might like a little fruit after dinner, and I went to Covent Garden Market to get a little fruit good.”  For a reason that you had, you felt as if you's eyes would start out of you's head. you acknowledged I's attention incoherently, and began to think this was a dream.  “Dear me!” said I. “This door sticks so!”  As I was fast making jam of I's fruit by wrestling with This door while the paper-bags were under I's arms, you begged I to allow you to hold the paper-bags. I relinquished the paper-bags with an agreeable smile, and combated with This door as if This door were a wild beast. This door yielded so suddenly at last, that I staggered back upon you, and you staggered back upon the opposite door, and we both laughed. But still you felt as if you's eyes must start out of you's head, and as if this must be a dream.  “Pray come in,” said I. “Allow I to  lead the way. I am rather bare here, but I hope you’ll be able to make out tolerably well till Monday. I's father thought you would get on more agreeably through to-morrow with I than with My father, and might like to take a walk about London. I am sure I shall be very happy to show London to you. As to our table, you won’t find that bad, I hope, for our table will be supplied from our's coffee-house here, and (it is only right I should add) at you's expense, such being Mr. Jaggers’s directions. As to our's lodging, our lodging’s not by any means splendid, because I have I's own bread to earn, and My father hasn’t anything to give I, and I shouldn’t be willing to take it, if My father had. This is our's sitting-room,—just such chairs and tables and carpet and so forth, you see, as they could spare from home. you mustn’t give I credit for the tablecloth and spoons and castors, because the tablecloth and spoons and castors come for you from our coffee-house here. This is I's little bedroom; rather musty, but Barnard’s _is_ musty. This is you's bedroom; the furn iture’s hired for the occasion, but I trust iture will answer the purpose; if you should want anything, I’ll go and fetch anything. The chambers are retired, and we shall be alone together, but we shan’t fight, I dare say. But dear me, I beg you's pardon, you’re holding the fruit all this time. Pray let I take these bags from you. I am quite ashamed.”  As I stood opposite to Mr. Pocket, Junior, delivering Mr. Pocket, Junior these bags, One, Two, I saw the starting appearance come into Mr. Pocket, Junior's own eyes that I knew to be in I, and Mr. Pocket, Junior said, falling back,—  “Lord bless Mr. Pocket, Junior, I’re the prowling boy!”  “And you,” said I, “are the pale young gentleman!”     Chapter XXII.   you and I stood contemplating one another in Barnard’s Inn, until The pale young gentleman and I burst out laughing. “The idea of its being I!” said you. “The idea of its's being _I_!” said I And then The pale young gentleman and I contemplated one another afresh, and laughed again. “Well!” said you, reaching out you's hand good-humouredly, “it’s all over now,  I hope, and it will be magnanimous in you if you’ll forgive I for having knocked you about so.”  you derived from this speech that I still rather confounded I's intention with the pale young gentleman’s's execution. But you made a modest reply, and we shook hands warmly.  “you hadn’t come into you's good fortune at that time?” said I.  “No,” said you  “No,” I acquiesced: “I heard it had happened very lately. _I_ was rather on the lookout for good fortune then.”  “Indeed?”  IYes. Miss Havisham had sent for I, to see if Miss Havisham could take a fancy to I. But Miss Havisham couldn’t,—at all events, Miss Havisham didn’t.”  you thought it polite to remark that you was surprised to hear that.  “Bad taste,” said I, laughing, “but a fact. Yes, Miss Havisham had sent for I on a trial visit, and if I had come out of a trial visit successfully, I suppose I should have been provided for; perhaps I should have been what-you-may-called it to Estella.”  “What’s that?” you asked, with sudden gr avity.  He was arranging He's fruit in plates while we talked, which divided He's attention, and was the cause of He's having made this lapse of a word. “Affianced,” He explained, still busy with his fruit. “Betrothed. Engaged. What’s-his-named. Any word of that sort.”  “How did He bear He's disappointment?” I asked.  “Pooh!” said He, “He didn’t care much for your disappointment. _She’s_ a Tartar.”  “Miss Havisham?”  “He don’t say no to that, but He meant Estella. Estella’s hard and haughty and capricious to the last degree, and has been brought up by Miss Havisham to wreak revenge on all the male sex.”  “What relation is Estella to Miss Havisham?”  “None,” said He. “Only adopted.”  “Why should Estella wreak revenge on all the male sex? What revenge?”  “Lord, I!” said He. “Don’t I know?”  “No,” said I  “Dear me! It’s quite a story, and shall be saved till dinner-time. And now let I take the liberty of asking He a question. How did He come there, that day?”  He told He, and He was attentive until He had  finished, and then burst out laughing again, and asked me if me was sore afterwards? me didn’t ask him if _him_ was, for me's conviction on that point was perfectly established.  “Mr. Jaggers is me's guardian, I understand?” him went on.  “Yes.”  “me know Mr. Jaggers is Miss Havisham’s man of business and solicitor, and has Miss Havisham’s's confidence when nobody else has?”  This was bringing me (me felt) towards dangerous ground. me answered with a constraint me made no attempt to disguise, that me had seen Mr. Jaggers in Miss Havisham’s's house on the very day of our combat, but never at any other time, and that me believed Mr. Jaggers had no recollection of having ever seen me there.  “Mr. Jaggers was so obliging as to suggest Mr. Jaggers's father for me's tutor, and Mr. Jaggers called on my father to propose your tutor. Of course Mr. Jaggers knew about my father from Mr. Jaggers's connection with Miss Havisham’s. my father is Miss Havisham’s's cousin; not that is implies familiar intercourse between them, for my father is a bad courtier and will not propitiate Miss Havisham’s.”  Herbert Pocket had  a frank and easy way with him that was very taking. I had never seen any one then, and I have never seen any one since, who more strongly expressed to I, in every look and tone, a natural incapacity to do anything secret and mean. There was something wonderfully hopeful about him's general air, and something that at the same time whispered to I him would never be very successful or rich. I don’t know how this was. I became imbued with the notion on that first occasion before we sat down to dinner, but I cannot define by what means.  him was still a pale young gentleman, and had a certain conquered languor about him in the midst of him's spirits and briskness, that did not seem indicative of natural strength. him had not a handsome face, but a handsome face was better than handsome: being extremely amiable and cheerful. him's figure was a little ungainly, as in the days when I's knuckles had taken such liberties with His figure, but it looked as if His figure would always be light and young. Whether him's local work  would have sat more gracefully on him than on me, may be a question; but me am conscious that him carried off him's rather old clothes much better than me carried off me's new suit.  As him was so communicative, me felt that reserve on me's part would be a bad return unsuited to our years. me therefore told him me's small story, and laid stress on me's being forbidden to inquire who me's benefactor was. me further mentioned that as me had been brought up a blacksmith in a country place, and knew very little of the ways of politeness, me would take it as a great kindness in him if him would give me a hint whenever him saw me at a loss or going wrong.  “With pleasure,” said him, “though him venture to prophesy that me’ll want very few hints. him dare say our shall be often together, and him should like to banish any needless restraint between our. Will me do him the favour to begin at once to call him by him's Christian name, Herbert?”  me thanked him and said me would. me informed him in exchange that my Christian name, Herbert was  Philip.  “I don’t take to Philip,” said I, smiling, “for Philip sounds like a moral boy out of the spelling-book, who was so lazy that he fell into a pond, or so fat that he couldn’t see out of he's eyes, or so avaricious that he locked up he's cake till the mice ate his cake, or so determined to go a bird’s-nesting that he got he eaten by bears who lived handy in the neighbourhood. I tell I what I should like. We are so harmonious, and I have been a blacksmith,—would I mind it?”  “I shouldn’t mind anything that I propose,” I answered, “but I don’t understand I.I  “Would I mind Handel for a familiar name? There’s a charming piece of music by Handel, called the Harmonious Blacksmith.”  “I should like a charming piece of music by Handel, called the Harmonious Blacksmith very much.”  “Then, Handel,” said I, turning round as the door opened, “here is the dinner, and I must beg of I to take the top of the table, because the dinner is of I's providing.”  This I would not hear of, so I took the top of the table, and I faced I. It was a nice little di nner,—seemed to me then a very Lord Mayor’s Feast,—and it acquired additional relish from being eaten under those independent circumstances, with no old people by, and with London all around us. additional relish again was heightened by a certain gypsy character that set the banquet off; for while the table was, as Mr. Pumblechook might have said, the lap of luxury,—being entirely furnished forth from the coffee-house,—the circumjacent region of sitting-room was of a comparatively pastureless and shifty character; imposing on the waiter the wandering habits of putting the covers on the floor (where the waiter fell over the covers), the melted butter in the arm-chair, the bread on the bookshelves, the cheese in the coal-scuttle, and the boiled fowl into me's bed in the next room,—where me found much of the boiled fowl's parsley and butter in a state of congelation when me retired for the night. All this made the banquet delightful, and when the waiter was not there to watch me, me's pleasure was without alloy.  us had made some progre ss in the dinner, when I reminded Herbert of Herbert's promise to tell I about Miss Havisham.  “True,” Herbert replied. “Herbert’ll redeem his promise to tell me about Miss Havisham at once. Let Herbert introduce the topic, I, by mentioning that in London it is not the custom to put the knife in the mouth,—for fear of accidents,—and that while the fork is reserved for that use, the fork is not put further in than necessary. It is scarcely worth mentioning, only it’s as well to do as other people do. Also, the spoon is not generally used over-hand, but under. is has two advantages. You get at your mouth better (which after all is the object), and you save a good deal of the attitude of opening oysters, on the part of the right elbow.”  Herbert offered these friendly suggestions in such a lively way, that we both laughed and I scarcely blushed.  “Now,” Herbert pursued, “concerning Miss Havisham. Miss Havisham, I must know, was a spoilt child. Miss Havisham's mother died when Miss Havisham was a baby, and Miss Havisham's father denied Miss Havisham's nothing. her father was a country gentleman down i n your part of the world, and was a brewer. I don’t know why it should be a crack thing to be a brewer; but it is indisputable that while your cannot possibly be genteel and bake, your may be as genteel as never was and brew. your see it every day.”  “Yet a gentleman may not keep a public-house; may a gentleman?” said I.  “Not on any account,” returned Herbert; “but a public-house may keep a gentleman. Well! Mr. Havisham was very rich and very proud. So was Mr. Havisham's daughter.”  “his daughter was an only child?” your hazarded.  “Stop a moment, Herbert am coming to that. No, his daughter was not an only child; his daughter had a half-brother. his daughter's privately married again—Mr. Havisham's cook, Herbert rather think.”  “your thought Mr. Havisham was proud,” said I.  “your's good Handel, so Mr. Havisham was. Mr. Havisham married his daughter privately, because Mr. Havisham was proud, and in course of time _his daughter_ died. When his daughter was dead, Herbert apprehend Mr. Havisham first told his daughter what Mr. Havisham had done, and then a half-brother became a part of the family, residing in the house your are acquainted with. As th e son grew a young man, e son turned out riotous, extravagant, undutiful,—altogether bad. At last e son's father disinherited e son; but his father softened when his father was dying, and left e son well off, though not nearly so well off as Miss Havisham.—Take another glass of wine, and excuse my mentioning that society as a body does not expect one to be so strictly conscientious in emptying one’s glass, as to turn one’s glass bottom upwards with the rim on one’s nose.”  my had been doing this, in an excess of attention to my's recital. my thanked my, and apologised. my said, “Not at all,” and resumed.  “Miss Havisham.—Take was now an heiress, and you may suppose was looked after as a great match. Miss Havisham.—Take's had now ample means again, but what with debts and what with new madness wasted them most fearfully again. There were stronger differences between e son and Miss Havisham.—Take than there had been between e son and his father, and it is suspected that e son cherished a deep and mortal grudge against Miss Havisham.—Take as having influenced his father's an ger. Now, I come to the cruel part of the story,—merely breaking off, I's dear Handel, to remark that a dinner-napkin will not go into a tumbler.”  Why my dear Handel was trying to pack my dear Handel into my dear Handel's tumbler, my dear Handel am wholly unable to say. my dear Handel only know that my dear Handel found my dear Handel, with a perseverance worthy of a much better cause, making the most strenuous exertions to compress my dear Handel within those limits. Again my dear Handel thanked I and apologised, and again I said in the cheerfullest manner, “Not at all, I am sure!” and resumed.  “There appeared upon the scene—say at the races, or the public balls, or anywhere else you like—a certain man, who made love to Miss Havisham. my dear Handel never saw a certain man, who made love to Miss Havisham (for this happened five-and-twenty years ago, before you and my dear Handel were, my dear Handel), but my dear Handel have heard my dear Handel's father mention that a certain man, who made love to Miss Havisham was a showy man, and the kind of man for the purpose. But that a certain man, who made love to Miss Havisham was not to be, without ignorance or prejudice, mistaken for a gentleman, my father most strongly asseverates; because it is a principle of my father's that no man w ho was not a true gentleman at heart ever was, since the world began, a true gentleman in manner. ho says, no varnish can hide the grain of the wood; and that the more varnish you put on, the more the grain of the wood will express the grain of the wood. Well! ho pursued Miss Havisham closely, and professed to be devoted to Miss Havisham. I believe Miss Havisham had not shown much susceptibility up to that time; but all the susceptibility Miss Havisham possessed certainly came out then, and Miss Havisham passionately loved ho. There is no doubt that Miss Havisham perfectly idolized ho. ho practised on Miss Havisham's affection in that systematic way, that ho got great sums of money from Miss Havisham, and ho induced Miss Havisham to buy Miss Havisham's brother out of a share in the brewery (which had been weakly left her brother by her brother's father) at an immense price, on the plea that when ho was Miss Havisham's husband ho must hold and manage it all. Your guardian was not at that time in Miss Havisham's counsels, and Miss Havisham was too haughty and too much in love to be advised by any one. Miss Havisham's relations were poor and scheming , with the exception of my father; my father was poor enough, but not time-serving or jealous. my father, my father warned her that her was doing too much for this man, and was placing her too unreservedly in this man's power. her took the first opportunity of angrily ordering my's out of the house, in my father's presence, and my's has never seen her since.”  I thought of her having said, “Matthew will come and see her at last when her am laid dead upon that table;” and I asked Herbert whether Herbert's was so inveterate against her?  “It’s not that,” said Herbert, “but her charged my father, in the presence of this man, with being disappointed in the hope of fawning upon her for my father's own advancement, and, if my father were to go to her now, it would look true—even to my father—and even to her. To return to this man and make an end of this man. The marriage day was fixed, the wedding dresses were bought, the wedding tour was planned out, the wedding guests were invited. The marriage day came, but not th e bridegroom. He wrote her a letter—”  “Which her received,” I struck in, “when her was dressing for her's marriage? At twenty minutes to nine?”  “At the hour and minute,” said Herbert, nodding, “at which her afterwards stopped all the clocks. What was in a letter, further than that a letter most heartlessly broke her marriage off, Herbert can’t tell I, because Herbert don’t know. When her recovered from a bad illness that her had, her laid the whole place waste, as I have seen it, and her has never since looked upon the light of day.”  “Is that all the story?” I asked, after considering that.  “All Herbert know of it; and indeed Herbert only know so much, through piecing it out for Herbert; for Herbert's father always avoids it, and, even when her invited Herbert to go there, told Herbert no more of it than it was absolutely requisite Herbert should understand. But Herbert have forgotten one thing. It has been supposed that He acted throughout in concert with her's half-brother; that it was a co nspiracy between them; and that them shared the profits.”  “I wonder he didn’t marry her and get all the property,” said I.  “he may have been married already, and her's cruel mortification may have been a part of her's half-brother’s scheme,” said Herbert. “Mind! Herbert don’t know been.”  “What became of them?” I asked, after again considering the subject.  “them fell into deeper shame and degradation—if there can be deeper—and ruin.”  “Are them alive now?”  “Herbert don’t know.”  “Herbert said just now that her was not related to Miss Havisham, but adopted. When adopted?”  Herbert shrugged Herbert's shoulders. “There has always been an Estella, since Herbert have heard of a Miss Havisham. Herbert know no more. And now, I,” said Herbert, finally throwing off the story as it were, “there is a perfectly open understanding between us. All that Herbert know about Miss Havisham, I know.”  “And all that I know,” I retorted, “Herbert know.”  “Herbert fully believe it. So there can be no competition or perplexity between us . And as to the condition on which you hold you's advancement in life,—namely, that you are not to inquire or discuss to whom you owe it,—you may be very sure that it will never be encroached upon, or even approached, by me, or by any one belonging to me.”  In truth, me said this with so much delicacy, that you felt the subject done with, even though you should be under me's father’s roof for years and years to come. Yet me said this with so much meaning, too, that you felt me as perfectly understood Miss Havisham to be you's benefactress, as you understood the fact you.  It had not occurred to you before, that me had led up to the theme for the purpose of clearing the theme out of our way; but our were so much the lighter and easier for having broached the theme, that you now perceived this to be the case. our were very gay and sociable, and you asked me, in the course of conversation, what me was? me replied, “A capitalist,—an Insurer of Ships.” you suppose me saw you glancing about the room in search of some tokens o f Shipping, or capital, for he added, “In the City.”  I had grand ideas of the wealth and importance of Insurers of Ships in the City, and I began to think with awe of having laid a young Insurer on a young Insurer's back, blackened a young Insurer's enterprising eye, and cut a young Insurer's responsible head open. But again there came upon I, for I's relief, that odd impression that he would never be very successful or rich.  “he shall not rest satisfied with merely employing he's capital in insuring ships. he shall buy up some good Life Assurance shares, and cut into the Direction. he shall also do a little in the mining way. None of these things will interfere with he's chartering a few thousand tons on he's own account. he think he shall trade,” said he, leaning back in he's chair, “to the East Indies, for silks, shawls, spices, dyes, drugs, and precious woods. trade’s an interesting trade.”  “And the profits are large?” said I.  “Tremendous!” said he.  I wavered again, and began to think here were greater expectations than  my own.  [Illustration]  “I think I shall trade, also,” said I, putting I's thumbs in I's waist-coat pockets, “to the West Indies, for sugar, tobacco, and rum. Also to Ceylon, especially for elephants’ tusks.”  “I will want a good many ships,” said I.  “A perfect fleet,” said I.  Quite overpowered by the magnificence of these transactions, I. asked I where the ships I insured mostly traded to at present?  “I haven’t begun insuring yet,” I replied. “I am looking about I.”  Somehow, looking seemed more in keeping with Barnard’s Inn. I. said (in a tone of conviction), “Ah-h!”  “Yes. I am in a counting-house, and looking about I.”  “Is a counting-house profitable?” I. asked.  “To—do I. mean to the young fellow who’s in a counting-house?” I asked, in reply.  “Yes; to I..”  “Why, n-no; not to I.” I said this with the air of one carefully reckoning up and striking a balance. “Not directly profitable. That is, a counting-house doesn’t pay I anything, and I have to—keep I.”  This certainly had not a  profitable appearance, and I shook I's head as if I would imply that it would be difficult to lay by much accumulative capital from such a source of income.  “But the thing is,” said Herbert Pocket, “that you look about you. _That’s_ the grand thing. You are in a counting-house, you know, and you look about you.”  It struck I as a singular implication that you couldn’t be out of a counting-house, you know, and look about you; but I silently deferred to Herbert Pocket's experience.  “Then the time comes,” said Herbert Pocket, “when you see your opening. And you go in, and you swoop upon your opening and you make your capital, and then there you are! When you have once made your capital, you have nothing to do but employ your capital.”  This was very like Herbert Pocket's way of conducting that encounter in the garden; very like. Herbert Pocket's manner of bearing Herbert Pocket's poverty, too, exactly corresponded to Herbert Pocket's manner of bearing that defeat. It seemed to I that Herbert Pocket took all blows and buffets now with just the same air as Herbert Pocket had taken I then. It was e vident that he had nothing around he but the simplest necessaries, for everything that I remarked upon turned out to have been sent in on I's account from the coffee-house or somewhere else.  Yet, having already made he's fortune in he's own mind, he was so unassuming with his fortune that I felt quite grateful to he for not being puffed up. It was a pleasant addition to he's naturally pleasant ways, and we got on famously. In the evening we went out for a walk in the streets, and went half-price to the Theatre; and next day we went to church at Westminster Abbey, and in the afternoon we walked in the Parks; and I wondered who shod all the horses there, and wished he did.  On a moderate computation, it was many months, that Sunday, since I had left he and Biddy. The space interposed between Joe and Biddy Joe and Biddy partook of that expansion, and our marshes were any distance off. That I could have been at our's old church in I's old church-going clothes, on that Sunday, seemed a comb ination of impossibilities, geographical and social, solar and lunar. Yet in the London streets so crowded with people and so brilliantly lighted in the dusk of evening, there were depressing hints of reproaches for that I had put the poor old kitchen at home so far away; and in the dead of night, the footsteps of some incapable impostor of a porter mooning about Barnard’s Inn, under pretence of watching Barnard’s Inn, fell hollow on I's heart.  On the Monday morning at a quarter before nine, Herbert went to the counting-house to report himself,—to look about Herbert, too, I suppose,—and I bore Herbert company. Herbert was to come away in an hour or two to attend I to Hammersmith, and I was to wait about for Herbert. It appeared to I that the eggs from which young Insurers were hatched were incubated in dust and heat, like the eggs of ostriches, judging from the places to which those incipient giants repaired on a Monday morning. Nor did the counting-house, show in I's eyes as at all a good  Observatory; being a back second floor up a yard, of a grimy presence in all particulars, and with a look into another back second floor, rather than a look out.  I waited about until it was noon, and I went upon ’Change, and I saw fluey men sitting there under the bills about shipping, whom I took to be great merchants, though I couldn’t understand why fluey men should all be out of spirits. When Herbert came, we went and had lunch at a celebrated house which I then quite venerated, but now believe to have been the most abject superstition in Europe, and where I could not help noticing, even then, that there was much more gravy on the tablecloths and knives and waiters’ clothes, than in the steaks. This collation disposed of at a moderate price (considering the grease, which was not charged for), we went back to Barnard’s Inn and got I's little portmanteau, and then took coach for Hammersmith. we arrived there at two or three o’clock in the afternoon, and had very little way to walk to Mr.  Pocket’s house. Lifting the latch of a gate, we passed direct into a little garden overlooking the river, where Mr. Pocket’s children were playing about. And unless I deceive I on a point where I's interests or prepossessions are certainly not concerned, I saw that Mr. Pocket’s children Mr. Pocket’s's were not growing up or being brought up, but were tumbling up.  Mr. Pocket’s was sitting on a garden chair under a tree, reading, with Mr. Pocket’s's legs upon another garden chair; and Mr. Pocket’s's two nurse-maids were looking about Mr. and Mrs. Pocket’s while Mr. Pocket’s children played. “Mr. Pocket’s,” said Herbert, “I is young Mr. Pip.” Upon which Mr. Pocket’s received I with an appearance of amiable dignity.  “Master Alick and Miss Jane,” cried one of Mrs. Pocket’s two nurse-maids to two of Mr. Pocket’s children, “if two of the children go a bouncing up against them bushes two of the children’ll fall over into the river and be drownded, and what’ll two of the children's pa say then?”  At the same time one of the nurses picked up Mr. Pocket’s's handkerchief, and said, “If that don’t make six times you’ve dro pped it, Mum!” Upon which Mum laughed and said, “Thank you, you,” and settling Mum in one chair only, resumed Mum's book. Mum's countenance immediately assumed a knitted and intent expression as if Mum had been reading for a week, but before Mum could have read half a dozen lines, Mum fixed Mum's eyes upon you, and said, “Mum hope you's mamma is quite well?” This unexpected inquiry put you into such a difficulty that you began saying in the absurdest way that if there had been any such person you had no doubt any such person would have been quite well and would have been very much obliged and would have sent any such person's compliments, when the nurse came to you's rescue.  “Well!” the nurse cried, picking up the pocket-handkerchief, “if that don’t make seven times! What ARE Mum a-doing of this afternoon, Mum!” Mum received the pocket-handkerchief, at first with a look of unutterable surprise as if Mum had never seen the pocket-handkerchief before, and then with a laugh of recognition, and said, “Thank you, you,” and forgot you, and went  on reading.  I found, now I had leisure to count them, that there were no fewer than six little Pockets present, in various stages of tumbling up. I had scarcely arrived at the total when a seventh was heard, as in the region of air, wailing dolefully.  “If there ain’t Baby!” said Flopson, appearing to think it most surprising. “Make haste up, Millers.”  Millers retired into the house, and by degrees wailing was hushed and stopped, as if a seventh were a young ventriloquist with something in a young ventriloquist with something in its mouth's mouth. Mrs. Pocket read all the time, and I was curious to know what the book could be.  We were waiting, I supposed, for Mrs. Pocket to come out to We; at any rate We waited there, and so I had an opportunity of observing the remarkable family phenomenon that whenever any of the children strayed near Mrs. Pocket in any of the children's play, any of the children always tripped any of the children up and tumbled over her,—always very much to Mrs. Pocket's momentary astonishment, and any of the children's own more enduring lament ation. I was at a loss to account for this surprising circumstance, and could not help giving I's mind to speculations about this surprising circumstance, until by and by Millers came down with the baby, which baby was handed to Flopson, which Flopson was handing the baby to Mrs. Pocket, when she too went fairly head foremost over Mrs. Pocket, baby and all, and was caught by Herbert and I.  “Gracious Mrs. Pocket, Flopson!” said Mrs. Pocket, looking off Mrs. Pocket's book for a moment, “everybody’s tumbling!”  “Gracious Mrs. Pocket, indeed, Mrs. Pocket!” returned Flopson, very red in the face; “what have Mrs. Pocket got there?”  “_Mrs. Pocket_ got here, Flopson?” asked Mrs. Pocket.  “Why, if it ain’t Mrs. Pocket's footstool!” cried Flopson. “And if Mrs. Pocket keep it under Mrs. Pocket's skirts like that, who’s to help tumbling? Here! Take the baby, Mrs. Pocket, and give Flopson her book.”  Mrs. Pocket acted on the advice, and inexpertly danced the baby a little in Mrs. Pocket's lap, while the other children played about the baby. This had lasted but a very short time, when Mrs. Pocket issued summary orders that they  were all to be taken into the house for a nap. Thus I made the second discovery on that first occasion, that the nurture of the little Pockets consisted of alternately tumbling up and lying down.  Under these circumstances, when Flopson and Millers had got the children into the house, like a little flock of sheep, and Mr. Pocket came out of the house to make I's acquaintance, I was not much surprised to find that Mr. Pocket was a gentleman with a rather perplexed expression of face, and with Mr. Pocket's very grey hair disordered on Mr. Pocket's head, as if Mr. Pocket didn’t quite see Mr. Pocket's way to putting anything straight.     Chapter XXIII.   Mr. Pocket said Mr. Pocket was glad to see I, and Mr. Pocket hoped I was not sorry to see Mr. Pocket. “For, Mr. Pocket really am not,” Mr. Pocket added, with Mr. Pocket's son’s smile, “an alarming personage.” Mr. Pocket was a young-looking man, in spite of Mr. Pocket's perplexities and his very grey hair, and Mr. Pocket's manner seemed quite natural. I use the word natural, in the sense of the word natural's being unaffected; there was something comic in Mr. Pocket's distraug ht way, as though it would have been downright ludicrous but for his own perception that it was very near being so. When his had talked with me a little, his said to Mrs. Pocket, with a rather anxious contraction of his's eyebrows, which were black and handsome, “Mrs. Pocket, his hope Mrs. Pocket have welcomed his?” And Mrs. Pocket looked up from Mrs. Pocket's book, and said, “Yes.” Mrs. Pocket then smiled upon me in an absent state of mind, and asked me if me liked the taste of orange-flower water? As asked had no bearing, near or remote, on any foregone or subsequent transaction, me consider asked to have been thrown out, like Mrs. Pocket's previous approaches, in general conversational condescension.  me found out within a few hours, and may mention at once, that Mrs. Pocket was the only daughter of a certain quite accidental deceased Knight, who had invented for himself a conviction that himself's deceased father would have been made a Baronet but for somebody’s determined opposition arising out of entirely personal motives,—I forget w hose, if I ever knew,—the Sovereign’s, the Prime Minister’s, the Lord Chancellor’s, the Archbishop of Canterbury’s, anybody’s,—and had tacked himself on to the nobles of the earth in right of this quite supposititious fact. I believe himself had been knighted himself for storming the English grammar at the point of the pen, in a desperate address engrossed on vellum, on the occasion of the laying of the first stone of some building or other, and for handing some Royal Personage either the trowel or the mortar. Be that as it may, himself had directed I to be brought up from I's cradle as one who in the nature of things must marry a title, and who was to be guarded from the acquisition of plebeian domestic knowledge.  So successful a watch and ward had been established over I by himself, that I had grown up highly ornamental, but perfectly helpless and useless. With I's character thus happily formed, in the first bloom of I's youth I had encountered Mr. Poc ket: who was also in the first bloom of youth, and not quite decided whether to mount to the Woolsack, or to roof himself in with a mitre. As himself's doing the one or the other was a mere question of time, himself and Mrs. Pocket had taken Time by the forelock (when, to judge from the forelock's length, the forelock would seem to have wanted cutting), and had married without the knowledge of the judicious parent. the judicious parent, having nothing to bestow or withhold but the judicious parent's blessing, had handsomely settled his blessing upon he and Mrs. Pocket after a short struggle, and had informed himself that Mrs. Pocket was “a treasure for a Prince.” himself had invested a treasure for a Prince in the ways of the world ever since, and a treasure for a Prince was supposed to have brought himself in but indifferent interest. Still, Mrs. Pocket was in general the object of a queer sort of respectful pity, because Mrs. Pocket had not married a title; while himself was the object of a queer sort of forgiving reproach, because himself had never got one.  himself took me into  the house and showed me me's room: which was a pleasant one, and so furnished as that me could use my room: which was a pleasant one, and so furnished as that I could use it with comfort for my own private sitting-room with comfort for me's own private sitting-room. He then knocked at the doors of two other similar rooms, and introduced me to two other similar rooms's occupants, by name Drummle and Startop. Drummle, was whistling. Startop, younger in years and appearance, was reading and holding Startop, younger in years and appearance's head, as if Startop, younger in years and appearance thought Startop, younger in years and appearance in danger of exploding his head with too strong a charge of knowledge.  Both Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had such a noticeable air of being in somebody else’s hands, that me wondered who really was in possession of the house and let Both Mr. and Mrs. Pocket live there, until me found this unknown power to be the servants. It was a smooth way of going on, perhaps, in respect of saving trouble; but It had the appearance of being expensive, for the servants felt it a duty the servants owed to the servants to be nice in the servants's eating and drinking, and to keep a deal of company downstairs. T hey allowed a very liberal table to Mr. and Mrs. Pocket, yet it always appeared to me that by far the best part of the house to have boarded in would have been the kitchen,—always supposing the boarder capable of self-defence, for, before me had been there a week, a neighbouring lady with whom the family were personally unacquainted, wrote in to say that a neighbouring lady with whom the family were personally unacquainted had seen Millers slapping the baby. wrote greatly distressed Mrs. Pocket, who burst into tears on receiving the note, and said that it was an extraordinary thing that the neighbours couldn’t mind the neighbours's own business.  By degrees me learnt, and chiefly from Herbert, that Mrs. Pocket had been educated at Harrow and at Cambridge, where Mrs. Pocket had distinguished Mrs. Pocket; but that when Mrs. Pocket had had the happiness of marrying Mrs. Pocket very early in life, Mrs. Pocket had impaired Mrs. Pocket's prospects and taken up the calling of a Grinder. After grinding a number of dull blades,—of whom it was remarkable that their fathers, when influential, were always going to he lp him to preferment, but always forgot to do lp when the blades had left the Grindstone,—he had wearied of that poor work and had come to London. Here, after gradually failing in loftier hopes, him had “read” with divers who had lacked opportunities or neglected opportunities, and had refurbished divers others for special occasions, and had turned him's acquirements to the account of literary compilation and correction, and on such means, added to some very moderate private resources, still maintained the house I saw.  Mr. and Mrs. Pocket had a toady neighbour; a widow lady of that highly sympathetic nature that a toady neighbour agreed with everybody, blessed everybody, and shed smiles and tears on everybody, according to circumstances. a toady neighbour's name was Mrs. Coiler, and I had the honour of taking a toady neighbour down to dinner on the day of I's installation. a toady neighbour gave I to understand on the stairs, that it was a blow to Mr. and Mrs. Pocket that Mr. and Mrs. Pocket should be under the necessity of receiving gentlemen to read  with him. That did not extend to me, she told me in a gush of love and confidence (at that time, me had known she something less than five minutes); if they were all like me, it would be quite another thing.  “But she,” said Mrs. Coiler, “after she's early disappointment (not that she was to blame in her early disappointment), requires so much luxury and elegance—”  “Yes, Mrs. Coiler,” me said, to stop Mrs. Coiler, for me was afraid Mrs. Coiler was going to cry.  “And she is of so aristocratic a disposition—”  “Yes, Mrs. Coiler,” me said again, with the same object as before.  “—That it _is_ hard,” said Mrs. Coiler, “to have him's time and attention diverted from she.”  me could not help thinking that it might be harder if him's time and attention were diverted from she; but me said nothing, and indeed had enough to do in keeping a bashful watch upon me's company manners.  It came to me's knowledge, through what passed between she and Drummle while me was attentive to  my knife and fork, spoon, glasses, and other instruments of self-destruction, that Drummle, whose Christian name was Bentley, was actually the next heir but one to a baronetcy. It further appeared that the book my had seen Mrs. Pocket reading in the garden was all about titles, and that Mrs. Pocket knew the exact date at which Mrs. Pocket's grandpapa would have come into the book I had seen Mrs. Pocket reading in the garden, if her grandpapa ever had come at all. Drummle, whose Christian name was Bentley didn’t say much, but in Drummle, whose Christian name was Bentley's limited way (Drummle, whose Christian name was Bentley struck my as a sulky kind of fellow) Drummle, whose Christian name was Bentley spoke as one of the elect, and recognised Mrs. Pocket as a woman and a sister. No one but themselves and Mrs. Coiler the toady neighbour showed any interest in this part of the conversation, and it appeared to my that it was painful to Herbert; but it promised to last a long time, when the page came in with the announcement of a domestic affliction. It was, in effect, that the cook had mislaid the beef. To my's unutterable amazement, my now, for the first time, saw Mrs. Pocket relieve Mrs. Pocket's mind by going through a  performance that struck me as very extraordinary, but which made no impression on anybody else, and with which me soon became as familiar as the rest. He laid down the carving-knife and fork,—being engaged in carving, at the moment,—put He's two hands into He's disturbed hair, and appeared to make an extraordinary effort to lift He up by his disturbed hair. When He had done this, and had not lifted He up at all, He quietly went on with what He was about.  Mrs. Coiler then changed the subject and began to flatter me. me liked it for a few moments, but Mrs. Coiler flattered me so very grossly that the pleasure was soon over. Mrs. Coiler had a serpentine way of coming close at me when Mrs. Coiler pretended to be vitally interested in the friends and localities me had left, which was altogether snaky and fork-tongued; and when Mrs. Coiler made an occasional bounce upon Startop (who said very little to Mrs. Coiler), or upon Drummle (who said less), me rather envied them for being on the opposite side of the table.  After dinner the children  were introduced, and Mrs. Coiler made admiring comments on their eyes, noses, and legs,—a sagacious way of improving their's minds. There were four little girls, and two little boys, besides the baby who might have been either, and the baby who might have been either's next successor who was as yet neither. They were brought in by Flopson and Millers, much as though Flopson and Millers had been recruiting somewhere for children and had enlisted children, while Mrs. Pocket looked at the young Nobles that ought to have been as if Mrs. Pocket rather thought Mrs. Pocket had had the pleasure of inspecting the young Nobles that ought to have before, but didn’t quite know what to make of the young Nobles that ought to have.  “Here! Give Flopson Mrs. Pocket's fork, Mrs. Pocket, and take the baby who might have been either,” said Flopson. “Don’t take the baby who might have been either that way, or Mrs. Pocket’ll get the baby who might have been either's head under the table.”  Thus advised, Mrs. Pocket took the baby who might have been either the other way, and got its head upon the table; which was announced to all present by a prodigious concussion.  “Dear, dear! Give its head Flopson back, Mrs. Pocket,” said Flopson; “and Miss Jane, come and dance to baby , do!”  One of the little girls, a mere mite who seemed to have prematurely taken upon One of the little girls, a mere mite who seemed to have prematurely taken upon herself some charge of the others some charge of the others, stepped out of One of the little girls, a mere mite who seemed to have prematurely taken upon herself some charge of the others's place by me, and danced to and from the baby until the baby left off crying, and laughed. Then, all the children laughed, and Mr. Pocket (who in the meantime had twice endeavoured to lift Mr. Pocket (who in the meantime had twice endeavoured to lift himself up by the hair) up by the hair) laughed, and we all laughed and were glad.  Flopson, by dint of doubling the baby at the joints like a Dutch doll, then got the baby safely into Mr. Pocket (who in the meantime had twice endeavoured to lift himself up by the hair)'s lap, and gave the baby the nut-crackers to play with; at the same time recommending Mr. Pocket (who in the meantime had twice endeavoured to lift himself up by the hair) to take notice that the handles of that instrument were not likely to agree with the baby's eyes, and sharply charging Miss Jane to look after the same. Then, the two nurses left the room, and had a lively scuffle on the staircase with a dissipated page who had waited at dinner, and who had clearly lost half a dissipated page who had waited at dinner, and who had clearly lost half his buttons at the gaming-table's buttons at the gaming-table.  me was made very uneasy in me's mind by Mr. Pocket (who in the meantime had twice endeavoured to lift himself up by the hair)'s falling into a discuss ion with Drummle respecting two baronetcies, while she ate a sliced orange steeped in sugar and wine, and, forgetting all about the baby on she's lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers. At length the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers, perceiving the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers's young brains to be imperilled, softly left the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers's place, and with many small artifices coaxed the dangerous weapon away. she finishing a sliced orange steeped in sugar and wine at about the same time, and not approving of this, said to the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers,—  “the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers, how dare the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers? Go and sit down this instant!”  “she,” lisped the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers, “baby ood have put hith eyeth out.”  “How dare the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers tell she so?” retorted she. “Go and sit down in the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers's chair this moment!”  she's dignity was so crushing, that I felt quite abashed, as if I I had done something to rouse Mrs. Pocket’s dignity.  “she,” remonstrated she, from the other end of the table, “how can she be so unreasonable? the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers only interfered for the protection of the baby on her lap, who did most appalling things with the nut-crackers.”  “she will not allow anybody to interfere, ” said Mrs. Pocket. “Mrs. Pocket am surprised, Matthew, that Matthew should expose Mrs. Pocket to the affront of interference.”  “Good God!” cried Mrs. Pocket, in an outbreak of desolate desperation. “Are infants to be nut-crackered into infants's tombs, and is nobody to save infants?”  “Mrs. Pocket will not be interfered with by Jane,” said Mrs. Pocket, with a majestic glance at Jane. “Mrs. Pocket hope Mrs. Pocket know Mrs. Pocket's poor grandpapa’s position. Jane, indeed!”  Mrs. Pocket got Mrs. Pocket's hands in Mrs. Pocket's hair again, and this time really did lift Mrs. Pocket some inches out of Mrs. Pocket's chair. “Hear this!” Mrs. Pocket helplessly exclaimed to the elements. “Babies are to be nut-crackered dead, for people’s poor grandpapa’s positions!” Then Mrs. Pocket let Mrs. Pocket down again, and became silent.  We all looked awkwardly at the tablecloth while this was going on. A pause succeeded, during which the honest and irrepressible baby made a series of leaps and crows at little Jane, who appeared to me to be the only member of the family (irrespective of servants) with  whom it had any decided acquaintance.  “Mr. Drummle,” said Mrs. Pocket, “will Mr. Drummle ring for Flopson? Jane, you undutiful little thing, go and lie down. Now, baby darling, come with Mrs. Pocket!”  baby darling was the soul of honour, and protested with all baby darling's might. baby darling doubled baby darling up the wrong way over Mrs. Pocket's arm, exhibited a pair of knitted shoes and dimpled ankles to the company in lieu of baby darling's soft face, and was carried out in the highest state of mutiny. And baby darling gained baby darling's point after all, for I saw baby darling through the window within a few minutes, being nursed by Jane.  It happened that the other five children were left behind at the dinner-table, through Flopson's having some private engagement, and the other five children's not being anybody else’s business. I thus became aware of the mutual relations between the other five children and Mrs. Pocket, which were exemplified in the following manner. Mrs. Pocket, with the normal perplexity of Mrs. Pocket's face heightened and Mrs. Pocket's hair rumpled, looked at the other five children for some minutes, as if Mrs. Pocket c ouldn’t make out how they came to be boarding and lodging in that establishment, and why they hadn’t been billeted by Nature on somebody else. Then, in a distant Missionary way he asked they certain questions,—as why little Joe had that hole in little Joe's frill, who said, Pa, Flopson was going to mend it when Flopson had time,—and how little Fanny came by that whitlow, who said, Pa, Millers was going to poultice it when that whitlow, who said, Pa, Millers was going to poultice it when she didn’t forget didn’t forget. Then, he melted into parental tenderness, and gave they a shilling apiece and told they to go and play; and then as they went out, with one very strong effort to lift he up by the hair he dismissed the hopeless subject.  In the evening there was rowing on the river. As Drummle and Startop had each a boat, I resolved to set up I, and to cut Drummle and Startop out. I was pretty good at most exercises in which country boys are adepts, but as I was conscious of wanting elegance of style for the Thames,—not to say for other waters,—I at once engaged to place I un der the tuition of the winner of a prize-wherry who plied at our stairs, and to whom I was introduced by I's new allies. This practical authority confused I very much by saying I had the arm of a blacksmith. If This practical authority could have known how nearly the compliment lost This practical authority This practical authority's pupil, I doubt if This practical authority would have paid the compliment.  There was a supper-tray after we got home at night, and I think we should all have enjoyed we, but for a rather disagreeable domestic occurrence. Mr. Pocket was in good spirits, when a housemaid came in, and said, “If Mr. Pocket please, Mr. Pocket, a housemaid should wish to speak to Mr. Pocket.”  “Speak to a housemaid's ?” said I. “How can a housemaid think of such a thing? Go and speak to Flopson. Or speak to I—at some other time.”  “Begging I's pardon, I,” returned a housemaid, “a housemaid should wish to speak at once, and to speak to Mr. Pocket.”  Hereupon, Mr. Pocket went out of the room, and we made the best of we until Mr. Pocket came back.  “This is a pretty thing, Belin da!” said Mr. Pocket, returning with a countenance expressive of grief and despair. “Here’s the cook lying insensibly drunk on the kitchen floor, with a large bundle of fresh butter made up in the cupboard ready to sell for grease!”  Mr. Pocket instantly showed much amiable emotion, and said, “This is that odious Sophia’s doing!”  “What do Mr. Pocket mean, Mr. Pocket?” demanded Mr. Pocket.  “that odious Sophia’s has told Mr. Pocket,” said Mr. Pocket. “Did Mr. Pocket not see that odious Sophia’s with Mr. Pocket's own eyes and hear that odious Sophia’s with Mr. Pocket's own ears, come into the room just now and ask to speak to Mr. Pocket?”  “But has that odious Sophia’s not taken Mr. Pocket downstairs, Mr. Pocket,” returned Mr. Pocket, “and shown Mr. Pocket the woman, and a large bundle of fresh butter made up in the cupboard ready to sell for grease too?”  “And do Mr. Pocket defend that odious Sophia’s, Mr. Pocket,” said Mr. Pocket, “for making mischief?”  Mr. Pocket uttered a dismal groan.  “Am Mr. Pocket, to be nothing in the house?” said Mr. Pocket. “Besides, the cook has always been a very nice respectful woman, and said in the most natural manner when the cook came to look after the situation,  that she felt I was born to be a Duchess.”  There was a sofa where Mr. Pocket stood, and Mr. Pocket dropped upon a sofa where Mr. Pocket stood in the attitude of the Dying Gladiator. Still in the attitude of the Dying Gladiator Mr. Pocket said, with a hollow voice, “Good night, I,” when I deemed it advisable to go to bed and leave Mr. Pocket.     Chapter XXIV.   After two or three days, when I had established I in I's room and had gone backwards and forwards to London several times, and had ordered all I wanted of I's tradesmen, Mr. Pocket and I had a long talk together. Mr. Pocket knew more of I's intended career than I knew I, for Mr. Pocket referred to Mr. Pocket's having been told by Mr. Jaggers that I was not designed for any profession, and that I should be well enough educated for I's destiny if I could “hold I's own” with the average of young men in prosperous circumstances. I acquiesced, of course, knowing nothing to the contrary.  Mr. Pocket advised I's attending certain places in London, for the acquisition of such mere rudiments as I wanted, and I's investing him wit h the functions of explainer and director of all my studies. He hoped that with intelligent assistance my should meet with little to discourage my, and should soon be able to dispense with any aid but He's. Through He's way of saying this, and much more to similar purpose, He placed He on confidential terms with my in an admirable manner; and my may state at once that He was always so zealous and honourable in fulfilling He's compact with my, that He made my zealous and honourable in fulfilling my with He. If He had shown indifference as a master, my have no doubt my should have returned the compliment as a pupil; He gave my no such excuse, and each of us did the other justice. Nor did my ever regard He as having anything ludicrous about He—or anything but what was serious, honest, and good—in He's tutor communication with my.  When these points were settled, and so far carried out as that my had begun to work in earnest, it occurred to my that if my could retain my's bedroom in Barnard’s  Inn, my life would be agreeably varied, while my's manners would be none the worse for Herbert’s society. Mr. Pocket did not object to this arrangement, but urged that before any step could possibly be taken in this arrangement, this arrangement must be submitted to my's guardian. my felt that this delicacy arose out of the consideration that this arrangement would save Herbert’s some expense, so my went off to Little Britain and imparted my's wish to Mr. Jaggers.  “If my could buy the furniture now hired for my,” said my, “and one or two other little things, my should be quite at home there.”  “Go it!” said Mr. Jaggers, with a short laugh. “Mr. Jaggers told my my’d get on. Well! How much do my want?”  my said my didn’t know how much.  “Come!” retorted Mr. Jaggers. “How much? Fifty pounds?”  “O, not nearly so much.”  “Five pounds?” said Mr. Jaggers.  This was such a great fall, that my said in discomfiture, “O, more than Five pounds.”  “More than Five pounds, eh!” retorted Mr. Jaggers, lying in wait for my, with Mr. Jaggers's hands in Mr. Jaggers's pockets, Mr. Jaggers's head on one si de, and his eyes on the wall behind me; “how much more?”  “It is so difficult to fix a sum,” said me, hesitating.  “Come!” said his. “Let’s get at it. Twice five; will Twice five do? Three times five; will Three times five do? Four times five; will Four times five do?”  me said me thought Four times five would do handsomely.  “Four times five will do handsomely, will Four times five?” said his, knitting his's brows. “Now, what do me make of four times five?”  “What do me make of four times five?”  “Ah!” said his; “how much?”  “me suppose his make four times five twenty pounds,” said me, smiling.  “Never mind what _his_ make four times five, his's ,” observed his, with a knowing and contradictory toss of his's head. “his want to know what _me_ make four times five.”  “Twenty pounds, of course.”  “Wemmick!” said his, opening his's office door. “Take me's written order, and pay me twenty pounds.”  This strongly marked way of doing business made a strongly marked impression on me, and a strongly marked impression not of an agreeable kind. his never laughed; but his wore grea t bright creaking boots, and, in poising himself on these boots, with himself's large head bent down and himself's eyebrows joined together, awaiting an answer, himself sometimes caused these boots to creak, as if _they_ laughed in a dry and suspicious way. As himself happened to go out now, and as Wemmick was brisk and talkative, I said to Wemmick that I hardly knew what to make of himself's manner.  “Tell himself said, and himself’ll take said as a compliment,” answered Wemmick; “himself don’t mean that I _should_ know what to make of it.—Oh!” for I looked surprised, “it’s not personal; it’s professional: only professional.”  Wemmick was at Wemmick's desk, lunching—and crunching—on a dry hard biscuit; pieces of which Wemmick threw from time to time into Wemmick's slit of a mouth, as if Wemmick were posting them.  “Always seems to Wemmick,” said Wemmick, “as if himself had set a man-trap and was watching a man-trap. Suddenly—click—you’re caught!”  Without remarking that man-traps were not among the amenities of life, I said I supposed himself was very skilful?   “Deep,” said Wemmick, “as Australia.” Pointing with Wemmick's pen at the office floor, to express that Australia was understood, for the purposes of the figure, to be symmetrically on the opposite spot of the globe. “If there was anything deeper,” added Wemmick, bringing Wemmick's pen to paper, “he’d be anything deeper.”  Then, I said I supposed Wemmick had a fine business, and Wemmick said, “Ca-pi-tal!” Then I asked if there were many clerks? to which Wemmick replied,—  “We don’t run much into clerks, because there’s only one Jaggers, and people won’t have only one Jaggers at second hand. There are WeWe. Would I like to see We? I are one of We, as Wemmick may say.”  I accepted the offer. When Wemmick had put all the biscuit into the post, and had paid I I's money from a cash-box in a safe, the key of which safe Wemmick kept somewhere down Wemmick's back and produced from Wemmick's coat-collar like an iron-pigtail, we went upstairs. The house was dark and shabby, and the greasy shoulders that had left the greasy shoulders that had left their mark in Mr. Jaggers’s room's mark in only one Jaggers's room s eemed to have been shuffling up and down the staircase for years. In the front first floor, a clerk who looked something between a publican and a rat-catcher—a large pale, puffed, swollen man—was attentively engaged with three or four people of shabby appearance, whom a clerk who looked something between a publican and a rat-catcher—a large pale, puffed, swollen man— treated as unceremoniously as everybody seemed to be treated who contributed to Mr. Jaggers’s coffers. “Getting evidence together,” said a clerk who looked something between a publican and a rat-catcher—a large pale, puffed, swollen man—, as we came out, “for the Bailey.” In the room over that, a little flabby terrier of a clerk with dangling hair (a little flabby terrier of a clerk with dangling hair (his cropping seemed to have been forgotten when he was a puppy)'s cropping seemed to have been forgotten when a little flabby terrier of a clerk with dangling hair (his cropping seemed to have been forgotten when he was a puppy) was a puppy) was similarly engaged with a man with weak eyes, whom a clerk who looked something between a publican and a rat-catcher—a large pale, puffed, swollen man— presented to me as a smelter who kept his pot always boiling, and who would melt me anything me pleased,—and who was in an excessive white-perspiration, as if he had been trying he's art on he. In a back room, a high-shouldered man with a face-ache tied up in dirty flannel, who was dressed in old black clothes that bore the appeara nce of having been waxed, was stooping over his work of making fair copies of the notes of the other two gentlemen, for Mr. Jaggers’s own use.  This was all the establishment. When we went downstairs again, Wemmick led me into me's guardian’s room, and said, “This me’ve seen already.”  “Pray,” said me, as the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon them caught me's sight again, “whose likenesses are the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon them?”  “the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon them?” said Wemmick, getting upon a chair, and blowing the dust off the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon them before bringing the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon them down. “the two odious casts with the twitchy leer upon them are two celebrated ones. Famous clients of ours that got ours a world of credit. This chap (why Wemmick must have come down in the night and been peeping into the inkstand, to get this blot upon Wemmick's eyebrow, Wemmick!) murdered Mr. Jaggers’s, and, considering that Wemmick wasn’t brought up to evidence, didn’t plan murdered badly.”  “Is it like him?” me asked, recoiling from Wemmick, as Wemmick spat upon your eyebrow and gave your eyebrow a rub with Wemmick's sleeve.  “Like him? It’s him f, you know. The cast was made in Newgate, directly after he was taken down. You had a particular fancy for me, hadn’t You, You?” said me. me then explained this affectionate apostrophe, by touching me's brooch representing the lady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon his brooch representing the lady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon it, and saying, “Had his brooch representing the lady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon it made for me, express!”  “Is the lady anybody?” said I.  “No,” returned me. “Only his game. (You liked Only his game, didn’t You?) No; deuce a bit of a lady in the case, You, except one,—and she wasn’t of this slender lady-like sort, and you wouldn’t have caught _she's_ looking after the urn, unless there was something to drink in the urn.” me's attention being thus directed to his brooch representing the lady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon it, me put down The cast, and polished his brooch representing the lady and the weeping willow at the tomb with the urn upon it with me's pocket-handkerchief.  “Did that other creature come to the same end?” You asked. “that other creature has the same look.”  “You’re right,” said me; “it’s the genuine look. Much as if one nostril was caught up with a horse-hair and a li ttle fish-hook. Yes, he came to the same end; quite the natural end here, I assure you. he forged wills, this blade did, if he didn’t also put the supposed testators to sleep too. You were a gentlemanly Cove, though” (You was again apostrophising), “and You said You could write Greek. Yah, You! What a liar You were! I never met such a liar as You!” Before putting You on You's shelf again, You touched the largest of You's mourning rings and said, “Sent out to buy the largest of his mourning rings for You, only the day before.”  While You was putting up the other cast and coming down from the chair, the thought crossed I's mind that all You's personal jewelry was derived from like sources. As You had shown no diffidence on the subject, I ventured on the liberty of asking You the question, when You stood before I, dusting You's hands.  “O yes,” You returned, “these are all gifts of that kind. One brings another, I see; that’s the way of it. You always take these. these’re curiosities. And these’re propert y. They may not be worth much, but, after all, They’re property and portable. It don’t signify to you with you's brilliant lookout, but as to myself, myself's guiding-star always is, ‘Get hold of portable property’.”  When you had rendered homage to this light, myself went on to say, in a friendly manner:—  “If at any odd time when you have nothing better to do, you wouldn’t mind coming over to see myself at Walworth, myself could offer you a bed, and myself should consider it an honour. myself have not much to show you; but such two or three curiosities as myself have got you might like to look over; and myself am fond of a bit of garden and a summer-house.”  you said you should be delighted to accept myself's hospitality.  “Thankee,” said myself; “then we’ll consider that it’s to come off, when convenient to you. Have you dined with Mr. Jaggers yet?”  “Not yet.”  “Well,” said myself, “Mr. Jaggers’ll give you wine, and good wine. myself’ll give you punch, and not bad punch. And now myself’ll tell you something. When you go to dine with Mr. Jaggers, look at  his housekeeper.”  “Shall “ see something very uncommon?”  “Well,” said Wemmick, ““’ll see a wild beast tamed. Not so very uncommon, “’ll tell Wemmick. Wemmick reply, that depends on the original wildness of a wild beast, and the amount of taming. It won’t lower “'s opinion of his's powers. Keep “'s eye on it.”  “ told Wemmick “ would do so, with all the interest and curiosity that Wemmick's preparation awakened. As “ was taking “'s departure, Wemmick asked “ if “ would like to devote five minutes to seeing his “at it?”  For several reasons, and not least because “ didn’t clearly know what his would be found to be “at,” “ replied in the affirmative. We dived into the City, and came up in a crowded police-court, where a blood-relation (in the murderous sense) of the deceased, with the fanciful taste in brooches, was standing at the bar, uncomfortably chewing something; while “'s guardian had a woman under examination or cross-examination,—I don’t know which,—and was striking a woman, and t he bench, and everybody present, with awe. If anybody, of whatsoever degree, said a word that he didn’t approve of, he instantly required to have a word that he didn’t approve of “taken down.” If anybody wouldn’t make an admission, he said, “he’ll have an admission out of anybody!” and if anybody made an admission, he said, “Now he have got anybody!” The magistrates shivered under a single bite of he's finger. Thieves and thief-takers hung in dread rapture on he's words, and shrank when a hair of he's eyebrows turned in Thieves and thief-takers's direction. Which side he was on I couldn’t make out, for he seemed to I to be grinding the whole place in a mill; I only know that when I stole out on tiptoe, he was not on the side of he bench; for, he was making the legs of the old gentleman who presided, quite convulsive under the table, by he's denunciations of he's conduct as the representative of British law and justice in that chair that day.     Chapter XXV.   Bentley Drummle, who was so sulky a fellow that Bentley Drummle, who was so sulky a fellow that he even took up a book as if its writer had done hi even took up a book as if a book's writer had done hi m an injury, did not take up an acquaintance in a more agreeable spirit. Heavy in figure, movement, and comprehension,—in the sluggish complexion of his face, and in the large, awkward tongue that seemed to loll about in his's mouth as his his lolled about in a room,—he was idle, proud, niggardly, reserved, and suspicious. his came of rich people down in Somersetshire, who had nursed this combination of qualities until they made the discovery that it was just of age and a blockhead. Thus, Bentley Drummle had come to Mr. Pocket when Bentley Drummle was a head taller than Mr. Pocket, and half a dozen heads thicker than most gentlemen.  Startop had been spoilt by a weak mother and kept at home when Startop ought to have been at school, but Startop was devotedly attached to a weak mother, and admired a weak mother beyond measure. Startop had a woman’s delicacy of feature, and was—“as you may see, though you never saw a weak mother,” said Herbert to me—“exactly like a weak mother.” It was but natural that you should take to Startop much more kindly tha n to Drummle, and that, even in the earliest evenings of our boating, our should pull homeward abreast of one another, conversing from boat to boat, while Drummle came up in our's wake alone, under the overhanging banks and among the rushes. Drummle would always creep in-shore like some uncomfortable amphibious creature, even when the tide would have sent Drummle fast upon Drummle's way; and I always think of Drummle as coming after our in the dark or by the back-water, when our's own two boats were breaking the sunset or the moonlight in mid-stream.  Herbert was I's intimate companion and friend. I presented Herbert with a half-share in I's boat, which was the occasion of Herbert's often coming down to Hammersmith; and I's possession of a half-share in Herbert's chambers often took I up to London. We used to walk between the two places at all hours. I have an affection for the road yet (though the road is not so pleasant a road as the road was then), formed in the impressibility of untried youth and hope.  When I had been in  Mr. Pocket’s family a month or two, Mr. and Mrs. Camilla turned up. Mrs. Camilla was Mr. Pocket’s's sister. Georgiana, whom I had seen at Miss Havisham’s on the same occasion, also turned up. Georgiana, whom I had seen at Miss Havisham’s on the same occasion was a cousin,—an indigestive single woman, who called Georgiana, whom I had seen at Miss Havisham’s on the same occasion's rigidity religion, and Georgiana, whom I had seen at Miss Havisham’s on the same occasion's liver love. These people hated I with the hatred of cupidity and disappointment. As a matter of course, These people fawned upon I in I's prosperity with the basest meanness. Towards Mr. Pocket’s, as a grown-up infant with no notion of a grown-up infant with no notion of his own interests's own interests, These people showed the complacent forbearance I had heard These people express. Mr. Pocket’s These people held in contempt; but These people allowed Mr. Pocket’s to have been heavily disappointed in life, because been shed a feeble reflected light upon These people.  These were the surroundings among which I settled down, and applied I to I's education. I soon contracted expensive habits, and began to spend an amount of money that within a few short months I should have thought almost fabulous; but thro ugh good and evil I stuck to I's books. There was no other merit in stuck, than I's having sense enough to feel I's deficiencies. Between Mr. Pocket and Herbert I got on fast; and, with one or the other always at I's elbow to give I the start I wanted, and clear obstructions out of I's road, I must have been as great a dolt as Drummle if I had done less.  I had not seen Mr. Wemmick for some weeks, when I thought I would write Mr. Wemmick a note and propose to go home with Mr. Wemmick on a certain evening. Mr. Wemmick replied that go would give Mr. Wemmick much pleasure, and that Mr. Wemmick would expect I at the office at six o’clock. Thither I went, and there I found Mr. Wemmick, putting the key of Mr. Wemmick's safe down Mr. Wemmick's back as the clock struck.  “Did I think of walking down to Walworth?” said Mr. Wemmick.  “Certainly,” said I, “if Mr. Wemmick approve.”  “Very much,” was Mr. Wemmick's reply, “for Mr. Wemmick have had Mr. Wemmick's legs under the desk all day, and shall be glad to stretch my legs. Now, Mr. Wemmick’ll tell I what Mr. Wemmick have got for supper, I. Mr. Wemmick have got a stewed steak,—which  is of home preparation,—and a cold roast fowl,—which is from the cook’s-shop. I think a cold roast fowl,—which is from the cook’s-shop’s tender, because the master of the cook’s-shop was a Juryman in some cases of ours the other day, and ours let the master of the shop down easy. I reminded the master of the shop of it when I bought a cold roast fowl,—which is from the cook’s-shop, and I said, “Pick ours out a good one, the master of the shop, because if ours had chosen to keep the master of the shop in the box another day or two, ours could easily have done it.” the master of the shop said to that, “Let the master of the shop make I a present of a cold roast fowl,—which is from the cook’s-shopthe cook’s-shop.” I let the master of the shop, of course. As far as it goes, a cold roast fowl,—which is from the cook’s-shop’s property and portable. I don’t object to an aged parent, the master of the shop hope?”  I really thought the master of the shop was still speaking of a cold roast fowl,—which is from the cook’s-shop, until the master of the shop added, “Because the master of the shop have got an aged parent at the master of the shop's place.” I then said what politeness required.  “So, I haven’t dined with Mr. Jaggers yet?” the master of the shop pursued, as we walked along.  “Not yet.”  “Mr. Jaggers told the master of the shop so this afternoon when Mr. Jaggers heard I were coming. the master of the shop expect I’ll have an invitation to-morrow. Mr. Jaggers’s going to ask I's pals, too. Three of ’em; ain’t t here?”  Although I was not in the habit of counting Drummle as one of I's intimate associates, I answered, “Yes.”  “Well, Drummle’s going to ask the whole gang,”—I hardly felt complimented by the word,—“and whatever Drummle gives I, Drummle’ll give I good. Don’t look forward to variety, but I’ll have excellence. And there’s another rum thing in Drummle's house,” proceeded Wemmick, after a moment’s pause, as if the remark followed on the housekeeper understood; “Drummle never lets a door or window be fastened at night.”  “Is Drummle never robbed?”  “That’s it!” returned Wemmick. “Drummle says, and gives it out publicly, “Drummle want to see the man who’ll rob _Drummle_.” Lord bless Wemmick, I have heard Drummle, a hundred times, if I have heard Drummle once, say to regular cracksmen in our front office, “regular cracksmen know where Drummle live; now, no bolt is ever drawn there; why don’t regular cracksmen do a stroke of business with Drummle? Come; can’t Drummle tempt regular cracksmen?” Not a man of them, I, would be bold enough to try it on, for love or money.”  “They dread Drummle so much?” I d I.  “Dread him,” said Wemmick. “Wemmick believe you they dread him. Not but what him’s artful, even in him's defiance of they. No silver, you. Britannia metal, every spoon.”  “So they wouldn’t have much,” you observed, “even if they—”  “Ah! But _him_ would have much,” said Wemmick, cutting you short, “and they know it. him’d have they's lives, and the lives of scores of ’em. him’d have all him could get. And it’s impossible to say what him couldn’t get, if him gave him's mind to it.”  you was falling into meditation on you's greatness, when Wemmick remarked:—  “As to the absence of plate, the absence of plate’s only him's natural depth, you know. A river’s A river's natural depth, and him’s him's natural depth. Look at him's watch-chain. That’s real enough.”  “his watch-chain’s very massive,” said I.  “Massive?” repeated Wemmick. “Wemmick think so. And his watch-chain is a gold repeater, and worth a hundred pound if his watch-chain’s worth a penny. you, there are about seven hundred thieves in this town who know all about his watch-chain; there’s not a man, a woman , or a child, among them, who wouldn’t identify the smallest link in that chain, and drop the smallest link in that chain as if the smallest link in that chain was red hot, if inveigled into touching the smallest link in that chain.”  At first with such discourse, and afterwards with conversation of a more general nature, did Mr. Wemmick and I beguile the time and the road, until Mr. Wemmick gave I to understand that Mr. Wemmick and I had arrived in the district of Walworth.  the district of Walworth appeared to be a collection of back lanes, ditches, and little gardens, and to present the aspect of a rather dull retirement. Mr. Wemmick's house was a little wooden cottage in the midst of plots of garden, and the top of Wemmick’s house was cut out and painted like a battery mounted with guns.  “Mr. Wemmick's own doing,” said Mr. Wemmick. “Looks pretty; don’t Wemmick’s house?”  I highly commended Wemmick’s house, I think Wemmick’s house was the smallest house I ever saw; with the queerest gothic windows (by far the greater part of the queerest gothic windows sham), and a gothic door almost too small to get in at.  “That’s a real flagstaff, you see,” said Mr. Wemmick, “and on Sundays Mr. Wemmick run up a real flag. Then loo k here. After I have crossed this bridge, I hoist this bridge up—so—and cut off the communication.”  this bridge was a plank, and this bridge crossed a chasm about four feet wide and two deep. But it was very pleasant to see the pride with which I hoisted this bridge up and made this bridge fast; smiling as I did so, with a relish and not merely mechanically.  “At nine o’clock every night, Greenwich time,” said I, “the gun fires. There he is, you see! And when you hear he go, I think you’ll say he’s a Stinger.”  he, was mounted in a separate fortress, constructed of lattice-work. he was protected from the weather by an ingenious little tarpaulin contrivance in the nature of an umbrella.  “Then, at the back,” said I, “out of sight, so as not to impede the idea of fortifications,—for it’s a principle with I, if you have an idea, carry an idea out and keep an idea up,—I don’t know whether that’s you's opinion—”  you said, decidedly.  “—At the back, there’s a pig, and there are fowls and rabb its; then, I knock together I's own little frame, you see, and grow cucumbers; and you’ll judge at supper what sort of a salad I can raise. So, you,” said I, smiling again, but seriously too, as I shook I's head, “if you can suppose the little place besieged, the little place would hold out a devil of a time in point of provisions.”  Then, I conducted you to a bower about a dozen yards off, but which was approached by such ingenious twists of path that it took quite a long time to get at; and in this retreat our glasses were already set forth. our's punch was cooling in an ornamental lake, on whose margin a bower about a dozen yards off, but which was approached by such ingenious twists of path that it took quite a long time to get at was raised. This piece of water (with an island in the middle which might have been the salad for supper) was of a circular form, and I had constructed a fountain in This piece of water (with an island in the middle which might have been the salad for supper), which, when you set a little mill going and took a cork out of a pipe, played to that powerful extent that it made the back of your hand quite wet.  “I am I's own engineer, and I's own carpenter, and I's own plumber, an d my own gardener, and my's own Jack of all Trades,” said Wemmick, in acknowledging my compliments. “Well; it’s a good thing, you know. it brushes the Newgate cobwebs away, and pleases the Aged. my wouldn’t mind being at once introduced to the Aged, would my? being wouldn’t put my out?”  my expressed the readiness my felt, and we went into the castle. There we found, sitting by a fire, a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf.  “Well aged parent,” said Wemmick, shaking hands with a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf in a cordial and jocose way, “how am a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf?”  “All right, Wemmick; all right!” replied a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf.  “Here’s a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf,” said Wemmick, “and Wemmick wish a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf could hear a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf's name. Nod away at a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf, a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf; Nod’s what a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf likes. Nod away at a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf, if a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf please, like winking!”  “This is a fine place of a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf, Wemmick,” cried a very old man in a flannel coat: clean, cheerful, comfortable, and well cared for, but intensely deaf, while my nodded as hard as my possibly could. “This is a pretty pleasure-ground, my. This and these beautiful works  upon it ought to be kept together by the Nation, after my son’s time, for the people’s enjoyment.”  “my’re as proud of it as Punch; ain’t my, Aged?” said Wemmick, contemplating mymy's ; “_there’s_ a nod for my;” giving my a tremendous one; “_there’s_ another for my;” giving my a still more tremendous one; “my like that, don’t my? If my’re not tired, my—though I know it’s tiring to strangers—will my tip my one more? my can’t think how tip pleases my.”  Wemmick tipped my several more, and my was in great spirits. We left my bestirring my to feed the fowls, and We sat down to We's punch in the arbour; where Wemmick told I, as Wemmick smoked a pipe, that it had taken Wemmick a good many years to bring the property up to the property's present pitch of perfection.  “Is the property Wemmick's own, Wemmick?”  “O yes,” said Wemmick, “Wemmick have got hold of the property, a bit at a time. the property’s a freehold, by George!”  “Is the property indeed? I hope Mr. Jaggers admires the property?”  “Never seen the property,”  said Wemmick. “Never heard of it. Never seen the Aged. Never heard of the Aged. No; the office is one thing, and private life is another. When Wemmick go into the office, Wemmick leave the Castle behind Wemmick, and when Wemmick come into the Castle, Wemmick leave the office behind Wemmick. If it’s not in any way disagreeable to you, you’ll oblige Wemmick by doing the same. Wemmick don’t wish it professionally spoken about.”  Of course you felt you's good faith involved in the observance of Wemmick's request. The punch being very nice, we sat there drinking The punch and talking, until it was almost nine o’clock. “Getting near gun-fire,” said Wemmick then, as Wemmick laid down Wemmick's pipe; “it’s the Aged treat.”  Proceeding into the Castle again, we found the Aged heating the poker, with expectant eyes, as a preliminary to the performance of this great nightly ceremony. Wemmick stood with Wemmick's watch in Wemmick's hand until the moment was come for Wemmick to take the poker from the Aged, and repair to the battery. Wemmick took the poker, and went out, and presently the Sti nger went off with a Bang that shook the crazy little box of a cottage as if the crazy little box of a cottage must fall to pieces, and made every glass and teacup in the crazy little box of a cottage ring. Upon this, the Aged—who I believe would have been blown out of the Aged—who I believe would have been blown out of his arm-chair but for holding on by the elbows's arm-chair but for holding on by the elbows—cried out exultingly, “He’s fired! I heerd He!” and I nodded at the Aged—who I believe would have been blown out of his arm-chair but for holding on by the elbows until it is no figure of speech to declare that I absolutely could not see the Aged—who I believe would have been blown out of his arm-chair but for holding on by the elbows.  The interval between that time and supper Wemmick devoted to showing I Wemmick's collection of curiosities. his collection of curiosities were mostly of a felonious character; comprising the pen with which a celebrated forgery had been committed, a distinguished razor or two, some locks of hair, and several manuscript confessions written under condemnation,—upon which Wemmick set particular value as being, to use Wemmick's own words, “every one of ’em Lies, I.” his collection of curiosities were agreeably dispersed among small specimens of china and glass, various neat trifles made by the proprietor of the museum, and some toba cco-stoppers carved by the Aged. They were all displayed in that chamber of the Castle into which I had been first inducted, and which served, not only as the general sitting-room but as the kitchen too, if I might judge from a saucepan on the hob, and a brazen bijou over the fireplace designed for the suspension of a roasting-jack.  There was a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after the Aged in the day. When a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after the Aged in the day had laid the supper-cloth, the bridge was lowered to give a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after the Aged in the day's means of egress, and a neat little girl in attendance, who looked after the Aged in the day withdrew for the night. The supper was excellent; and though the Castle was rather subject to dry-rot insomuch that The supper tasted like a bad nut, and though the pig might have been farther off, I was heartily pleased with I's whole entertainment. Nor was there any drawback on I's little turret bedroom, beyond there being such a very thin ceiling between I and the flagstaff, that when I lay down on I's back in bed, it seemed as if I had to balance the flagstaff on I's forehead all night.  Wemm ick was up early in the morning, and I am afraid I heard ick cleaning I's boots. After cleaning, ick fell to gardening, and I saw ick from I's gothic window pretending to employ the Aged, and nodding at the Aged in a most devoted manner. Our breakfast was as good as the supper, and at half-past eight precisely Our started for Little Britain. By degrees, ick got dryer and harder as Our went along, and ick's mouth tightened into a post-office again. At last, when Our got to ick's place of business and ick pulled out ick's key from ick's coat-collar, ick looked as unconscious of ick's Walworth property as if the Castle and the drawbridge and the arbour and the lake and the fountain and the Aged, had all been blown into space together by the last discharge of the Stinger.     Chapter XXVI.   It fell out as ick had told I it would, that I had an early opportunity of comparing I's guardian’s establishment with that of my guardian’s's cashier and clerk. my guardian’s was in my guardian’s's room, washing my guardian’s's hands with my guardian’s's scented soap,  when I went into the office from Walworth; and he called I to he, and gave I the invitation for I and friends which Wemmick had prepared I to receive. “No ceremony,” he stipulated, “and no dinner dress, and say to-morrow.” I asked he where we should come to (for I had no idea where he lived), and I believe it was in he's general objection to make anything like an admission, that he replied, “Come here, and he’ll take I home with he.” I embrace this opportunity of remarking that he washed he's clients off, as if he were a surgeon or a dentist. he had a closet in he's room, fitted up for the purpose, which smelt of the scented soap like a perfumer’s shop. a closet in his room, fitted up for the purpose, which smelt of the scented soap like a perfumer’s shop had an unusually large jack-towel on a roller inside the door, and he would wash he's hands, and wipe his hands and dry his hands all over an unusually large jack-towel on a roller, whenever he came in from a police court or dismissed a client from his room. When I and I's friends repaired to he at six o’clock next day, he seemed to have been engaged on a case of a d arker complexion than usual, for we found him with him's head butted into this closet, not only washing him's hands, but laving him's face and gargling him's throat. And even when him had done all that, and had gone all round the jack-towel, him took out him's penknife and scraped the case out of him's nails before him put him's coat on.  There were some people slinking about as usual when we passed out into the street, who were evidently anxious to speak with him; but there was something so conclusive in the halo of scented soap which encircled him's presence, that some people slinking about as usual when we passed out into the street, who were evidently anxious to speak with him gave it up for that day. As we walked along westward, him was recognised ever and again by some face in the crowd of the streets, and whenever recognised happened him talked louder to me; but him never otherwise recognised anybody, or took notice that anybody recognised him.  him conducted we to Gerrard Street, Soho, to a house on the south side of Gerrard Street, Soho. Rather a stately house of a house on the south side of that street's kind, but dolefully in want of painting, and with dirty w indows. He took out He's key and opened the door, and we all went into a stone hall, bare, gloomy, and little used. So, up a dark brown staircase into a series of three dark brown rooms on the first floor. There were carved garlands on the panelled walls, and as He stood among carved garlands on the panelled walls giving we all welcome, I know what kind of loops I thought carved garlands on the panelled walls looked like.  Dinner was laid in the best of three dark brown rooms on the first floor; the second was He's dressing-room; the third, He's bedroom. He told we all that He held the whole house, but rarely used more of the whole house than we all saw. The table was comfortably laid—no silver in the service, of course—and at the side of He's chair was a capacious dumb-waiter, with a variety of bottles and decanters on a capacious dumb-waiter, with a variety of bottles and decanters on it, and four dishes of fruit for dessert, and four dishes of fruit for dessert. I noticed throughout, that He kept everything under He's own hand, and distributed everything He.  There was a bookcase in the room; I saw from the backs of the books, that the books were about evidence, criminal law, criminal biography, trials, acts o f Parliament, and such things. The furniture was all very solid and good, like his watch-chain. The furniture had an official look, however, and there was nothing merely ornamental to be seen. In a corner was a little table of papers with a shaded lamp: so that his seemed to bring the office home with his in that respect too, and to wheel the office out of an evening and fall to work.  As his had scarcely seen my three companions until now,—for his and my had walked together,—he stood on the hearth-rug, after ringing the bell, and took a searching look at my three companions. To my's surprise, his seemed at once to be principally if not solely interested in Drummle.  “my,” said his, putting his's large hand on my's shoulder and moving my to the window, “his don’t know one from the other. Who’s the Spider?”  “The spider?” said my  “The blotchy, sprawly, sulky fellow.”  “the Spider’s Drummle,” my replied; “the one with the delicate face is Startop.”  Not making the least account of “the one with the delicate face,” his returned, “my tley Drummle is tley Drummle's name, is his name? I like the look of tley Drummle.”  I immediately began to talk to tley Drummle: not at all deterred by tley Drummle's replying in tley Drummle's heavy reticent way, but apparently led on by his heavy reticent way to screw discourse out of tley Drummle. I was looking at the two, when there came between I and the two the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table.  the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table was a woman of about forty, I supposed,—but I may have thought the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table younger than the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table was. Rather tall, of a lithe nimble figure, extremely pale, with large faded eyes, and a quantity of streaming hair. I cannot say whether any diseased affection of the heart caused the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table's lips to be parted as if the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table were panting, and the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table's face to bear a curious expression of suddenness and flutter; but I know that I had been to see Macbeth at the theatre, a night or two before, and that her face looked to I as if her face were all disturbed by fiery air, like the faces I had seen rise out of the Witches’ caldron.  the housekeeper, with the first dish for the table set the first dish for the table on, touched I's quietly on the  arm with a finger to notify that dinner was ready, and vanished. We took We's seats at the round table, and my guardian kept Drummle on one side of my guardian, while Startop sat on the other. It was a noble dish of fish that the housekeeper had put on table, and We had a joint of equally choice mutton afterwards, and then an equally choice bird. Sauces, wines, all the accessories We wanted, and all of the best, were given out by my guardian from my guardian's dumb-waiter; and when they had made the circuit of the round table, my guardian always put they back again. Similarly, my guardian dealt We clean plates and knives and forks, for each course, and dropped those just disused into two baskets on the ground by my guardian's chair. No other attendant than the housekeeper appeared. the housekeeper set on every dish; and my always saw in the housekeeper's face, a face rising out of the caldron. Years afterwards, my made a dreadful likeness of a face rising out of the caldron, by causing a face that had no other natural resemblance to a face that had no other natural resemblance to it than it derived from flowing hair than it derived from flowing hair to pass behind a bow l of flaming spirits in a dark room.  Induced to take particular notice of the housekeeper, both by the housekeeper's own striking appearance and by Wemmick’s preparation, I observed that whenever the housekeeper was in the room the housekeeper kept the housekeeper's eyes attentively on I's guardian, and that the housekeeper would remove the housekeeper's hands from any dish the housekeeper put before my guardian, hesitatingly, as if the housekeeper dreaded my guardian's calling the housekeeper back, and wanted my guardian to speak when the housekeeper was nigh, if my guardian had anything to say. I fancied that I could detect in my guardian's manner a consciousness of this, and a purpose of always holding the housekeeper in suspense.  Dinner went off gayly, and although my guardian seemed to follow rather than originate subjects, I knew that my guardian wrenched the weakest part of our dispositions out of our. For I, I found that I was expressing I's tendency to lavish expenditure, and to patronise Herbert, and to boast of I's great prospects, before I quite knew that I had opened I's lips. It was so with our, but with no one more than Drummle: the development of who se inclination to gird in a grudging and suspicious way at the rest, was screwed out of him before the fish was taken off.  It was not then, but when we had got to the cheese, that we's conversation turned upon we's rowing feats, and that Drummle was rallied for coming up behind of a night in that slow amphibious way of that Drummle's. that Drummle upon this, informed our host that that Drummle much preferred our's room to our's company, and that as to skill that Drummle was more than our's master, and that as to strength that Drummle could scatter our like chaff. By some invisible agency, my guardian wound that Drummle up to a pitch little short of ferocity about this trifle; and that Drummle fell to baring and spanning that Drummle's arm to show how muscular his arm was, and we all fell to baring and spanning we all's arms in a ridiculous manner.  Now the housekeeper was at that time clearing the table; my guardian, taking no heed of the housekeeper, but with the side of my guardian's face turned from the housekeeper, was leaning back in my guardian's chair biting the side of my guardian's forefinger and showing an interest in Dr ummle, that, to me, was quite inexplicable. Suddenly, he clapped he's large hand on the housekeeper’s, like a trap, as the housekeeper’s stretched his large hand across the table. So suddenly and smartly did he do clapped, that we all stopped in we all's foolish contention.  “If the housekeeper’s talk of strength,” said he, “_I_’ll show the housekeeper’s a wrist. the housekeeper’s, let them see the housekeeper’s's wrist.”  his large hand was on the table, but the housekeeper’s had already put the housekeeper’s's other hand behind the housekeeper’s's waist. “he,” the housekeeper’s said, in a low voice, with the housekeeper’s's eyes attentively and entreatingly fixed upon he. “Don’t.”  “_I_’ll show the housekeeper’s a wrist,” repeated he, with an immovable determination to show a wrist. “the housekeeper’s, let them see your wrist.”  “he,” the housekeeper’s again murmured. “Please!”  “the housekeeper’s,” said he, not looking at the housekeeper’s, but obstinately looking at the opposite side of the room, “let them see _both_ the housekeeper’s's wrists. Show them. Come!”  he took his large hand from the housekeeper’s, and turned his large hand up on the table. the housekeeper’s brought the housekeeper’s's other hand from behind the housekeeper’s, and held the two  out side by side. The last wrist was much disfigured,—deeply scarred and scarred across and across. When she held she's hands out she took she's eyes from Mr. Jaggers, and turned her eyes watchfully on every one of the rest of us in succession.  “There’s power here,” said Mr. Jaggers, coolly tracing out the sinews with Mr. Jaggers's forefinger. “Very few men have the power of wrist that she has. It’s remarkable what mere force of grip there is in her hands. Mr. Jaggers have had occasion to notice many hands; but Mr. Jaggers never saw stronger in that respect, man’s or woman’s, than her hands.”  While Mr. Jaggers said these words in a leisurely, critical style, she continued to look at every one of the rest of us us in regular succession as us sat. The moment Mr. Jaggers ceased, she looked at Mr. Jaggers again. “That’ll do, she,” said Mr. Jaggers, giving she a slight nod; “she have been admired, and can go.” she withdrew her hands and went out of the room, and Mr. Jaggers, putting the decanters on from Mr. Jaggers's dumb-waiter, filled Mr. Jaggers's glass and passed round the  wine.  “At half-past nine, gentlemen,” said he, “we must break up. Pray make the best use of gentlemen's time. he am glad to see gentlemen. Mr. Drummle, he drink to Mr. Drummle.”  If he's object in singling out Mr. Drummle were to bring Mr. Drummle out still more, his object in singling out Drummle perfectly succeeded. In a sulky triumph, Mr. Drummle showed Mr. Drummle's morose depreciation of the rest of us, in a more and more offensive degree, until Mr. Drummle became downright intolerable. Through all Mr. Drummle's stages, Mr. Jaggers followed Mr. Drummle with the same strange interest. Mr. Drummle actually seemed to serve as a zest to Mr. Jaggers's wine.  In gentlemen's boyish want of discretion I dare say gentlemen took too much to drink, and I know gentlemen talked too much. gentlemen became particularly hot upon some boorish sneer of Mr. Drummle's, to the effect that gentlemen were too free with gentlemen's money. some boorish sneer of Drummle’s, to the effect that we were too free with our money led to I's remarking, with more zeal than discretion, that it came with a bad grace from Mr. DrummleI's .  “Well,” retorted Mr. Drummle; “Mr. Drummle’ll be paid.”  “I don’t mean t o imply that he won’t,” said I, “but it might make he hold he's tongue about us and us's money, I should think.”  “_I_ should think!” retorted he. “Oh Lord!”  “I dare say,” I went on, meaning to be very severe, “that he wouldn’t lend money to any of us if us wanted money.”  “I are right,” said he. “he wouldn’t lend one of us a sixpence. he wouldn’t lend anybody a sixpence.”  “Rather mean to borrow under those circumstances, I should say.”  “_I_ should say,” repeated he. “Oh Lord!”  This was so very aggravating—the more especially as I found I making no way against he's surly obtuseness—that I said, disregarding Herbert’s efforts to check I,—  “Come, he, since we are on the subject, I’ll tell he what passed between Herbert’s and I, when he borrowed our money.”  “_he_ don’t want to know what passed between Herbert here and me,” growled he. And I think he added in a lower growl, that we might both go to the devil and shake we.  “I’ll tel l you, however,” said I, “whether you want to know or not. We said that as you put it in you's pocket very glad to get it, you seemed to be immensely amused at you's being so weak as to lend it.”  you laughed outright, and sat laughing in We's faces, with you's hands in you's pockets and you's round shoulders raised; plainly signifying that it was quite true, and that you despised We as asses all.  Hereupon Startop took you in hand, though with a much better grace than I had shown, and exhorted you to be a little more agreeable. Startop, being a lively, bright young fellow, and you being the exact opposite, you was always disposed to resent Startop as a direct personal affront. you now retorted in a coarse, lumpish way, and Startop tried to turn the discussion aside with some small pleasantry that made We laugh. Resenting this little success more than anything, you, without any threat or warning, pulled his hands out of his pockets, dropped his round shoulders, swore, took up a  large glass, and would have flung it at his adversary’s head, but for our entertainer’s dexterously seizing it at the instant when it was raised for flung.  “Gentlemen,” said our entertainer’s, deliberately putting down it, and hauling out our entertainer’s's gold repeater by his gold repeater's massive chain, “our entertainer’s am exceedingly sorry to announce that it’s half past nine.”  On this hint Gentlemen rose to depart. Before Gentlemen got to the street door, Startop was cheerily calling Drummle “old boy,” as if nothing had happened. But Drummle was so far from responding, that Drummle would not even walk to Hammersmith on the same side of the way; so Herbert and I, who remained in town, saw them going down the street on opposite sides; Startop leading, and Drummle lagging behind in the shadow of the houses, much as Drummle was wont to follow in Drummle's boat.  As the door was not yet shut, I, who remained in town thought I, who remained in town would leave Herbert there for a moment, and run upstairs again to say a word to I, who remained in town's guardian. I, who remained in town found my guardian in my guardian's dressing-room surrounded  by his stock of boots, already hard at his stock of boots, washing his's hands of us.  I told his I had come up again to say how sorry I was that anything disagreeable should have occurred, and that I hoped his would not blame I much.  “Pooh!” said his, sluicing his's face, and speaking through the water-drops; “it’s nothing, I. his like that Spider though.”  his had turned towards I now, and was shaking his's head, and blowing, and towelling his.  “I am glad his like that Spider, his,” said I—“but I don’t.”  “No, no,” I's assented; “don’t have too much to do with that Spider. Keep as clear of that Spider as I can. But his like that Spider, I; that Spider is one of the true sort. Why, if his was a fortune-teller—”  Looking out of the towel, his caught I's eye.  “But his am not a fortune-teller,” his said, letting his head drop into a festoon of towel, and towelling away at his's two ears. “I know what his am, don’t I? Good night, I.”  “Good night, I.”  In about a month after that, that Spider's time with Mr. Pocket was up for good,  and, to the great relief of all the house but Mrs. Pocket, he went home to the family hole.     Chapter XXVII.   “MY DEAR MR PIP:—  “MY write this by request of Mr. Gargery, for to let MY DEAR MR PIP know that Mr. Gargery is going to London in company with Mr. Wopsle and would be glad if agreeable to be allowed to see MY DEAR MR PIP. Mr. Gargery would call at Barnard’s Hotel Tuesday morning at nine o’clock, when if not agreeable please leave word. MY DEAR MR PIP's poor sister is much the same as when MY DEAR MR PIP left. We talk of MY DEAR MR PIP in the kitchen every night, and wonder what MY DEAR MR PIP are saying and doing. If now considered in the light of a liberty, excuse it for the love of poor old days. No more, MY DEAR MR PIP, from  “MY DEAR MR PIP's ever obliged, and affectionate servant, “BIDDY.”   “P.S. Mr. Gargery wishes MY most particular to write _what larks_. Mr. Gargery says MY DEAR MR PIP will understand. MY hope and do not doubt it will be agreeable to see Mr. Gargery, even though a gentleman, for MY DEAR MR PIP had ever a good heart, and Mr. Gargery is a worthy, worthy man. MY have read Mr. Gargery all, excepting only the last li ttle sentence, and he wishes me most particular to write again _what larks_.”  me received this letter by the post on Monday morning, and therefore this letter's appointment was for next day. Let me confess exactly with what feelings me looked forward to Joe’s coming.  Not with pleasure, though me was bound to Joe’s by so many ties; no; with considerable disturbance, some mortification, and a keen sense of incongruity. If me could have kept Joe’s away by paying money, me certainly would have paid money. me's greatest reassurance was that Joe’s was coming to Barnard’s Inn, not to Hammersmith, and consequently would not fall in Bentley Drummle’s way. me had little objection to Joe’s's being seen by Herbert or Joe’s's father, for both of whom me had a respect; but me had the sharpest sensitiveness as to Joe’s's being seen by Bentley Drummle’s. So, throughout life, our worst weaknesses and meannesses are usually committed for the sake of the people whom we most despise.  me had begun to be always decorating the ch ambers in some quite unnecessary and inappropriate way or other, and very expensive those wrestles with Barnard proved to be. By this time, the rooms were vastly different from what I had found the rooms, and I enjoyed the honour of occupying a few prominent pages in the books of a neighbouring upholsterer. I had got on so fast of late, that I had even started a boy in boots,—top boots,—in bondage and slavery to whom I might have been said to pass I's days. For, after I had made a boy in boots,—top boots,—in bondage and slavery to whom I might have been said to pass my days (out of the refuse of I's washerwoman’s family), and had clothed a boy in boots,—top boots,—in bondage and slavery to whom I might have been said to pass my days with a blue coat, canary waistcoat, white cravat, creamy breeches, and the boots already mentioned, I had to find a boy in boots,—top boots,—in bondage and slavery to whom I might have been said to pass my days a little to do and a great deal to eat; and with both of those horrible requirements a boy in boots,—top boots,—in bondage and slavery to whom I might have been said to pass my days haunted I's existence.  a boy in boots,—top boots,—in bondage and slavery to whom I might have been said to pass my days was ordered to be on duty at eight on Tuesday morning in the hall, (it was two feet square, as charged for floorcloth,) and Herbert suggested certain things for breakfast that Herbert thought Joe  would like. While I felt sincerely obliged to him for being so interested and considerate, I had an odd half-provoked sense of suspicion upon I, that if Joe had been coming to see _him_, him wouldn’t have been quite so brisk about it.  However, I came into town on the Monday night to be ready for Joe, and I got up early in the morning, and caused the sitting-room and breakfast-table to assume the sitting-room and breakfast-table's most splendid appearance. Unfortunately the morning was drizzly, and an angel could not have concealed the fact that him was shedding sooty tears outside the window, like some weak giant of a Sweep.  As the time approached I should have liked to run away, but the Avenger pursuant to orders was in the hall, and presently I heard Joe on the staircase. I knew it was Joe, by Joe's clumsy manner of coming upstairs,—his state boots being always too big for him,—and by the time it took Joe to read the names on the other floors in the course of Joe's ascent. When at last Joe stopped outside our door,  I could hear his finger tracing over the painted letters of I's name, and I afterwards distinctly heard his breathing in at the keyhole. Finally his gave a faint single rap, and Pepper—such was the compromising name of the avenging boy—announced “I!” I thought his never would have done wiping his's feet, and that I must have gone out to lift his off the mat, but at last his came in.  “his, how are his, his?”  “I, how AIR I, I?”  With his's good honest face all glowing and shining, and his's hat put down on the floor between us, his caught both I's hands and worked both my hands straight up and down, as if I had been the last-patented Pump.  “I am glad to see his, his. Give I his hat.”  But his, taking his hat up carefully with both hands, like a bird’s-nest with eggs in a bird’s-nest with eggs in it, wouldn’t hear of parting with his hat, and persisted in standing talking over his hat in a most uncomfortable way.  “Which I have that growed,” said his, “and that swelled, and that gentle-folked;” his consider ed a little before he discovered this word; “as to be sure he are a honour to he's king and country.”  “And you, you, look wonderfully well.”  “Thank God,” said you, “you’m ekerval to most. And he's sister, your sister’s no worse than your sister were. And Biddy, Biddy’s ever right and ready. And all friends is no backerder, if not no forarder. ’Ceptin Wopsle; he’s had a drop.”  All this time (still with both hands taking great care of the bird’s-nest), you was rolling you's eyes round and round the room, and round and round the flowered pattern of he's dressing-gown.  “Had a drop, you?”  “Why yes,” said you, lowering you's voice, “he’s left the Church and went into the playacting. Which the playacting have likeways brought he to London along with you. And he's wish were,” said you, getting the bird’s-nest under you's left arm for the moment, and groping in the bird’s-nest for an egg with you's right; “if no offence, as you would ’and he that.”  he took what you gave he, and found it to be the crumpled play-bill of a small metrop olitan theatre, announcing the first appearance, in that very week, of “the celebrated Provincial Amateur of Roscian renown, whose unique performance in the highest tragic walk of our National Bard has lately occasioned so great a sensation in local dramatic circles.”  “Were you at you's performance, you?” I inquired.  “you _were_,” said you, with emphasis and solemnity.  “Was there a great sensation?”  “Why,” said you, “yes, there certainly were a peck of orange-peel. Partickler when Partickler see the ghost. Though you put it to I, I, whether it were calc’lated to keep a man up to a man's work with a good hart, to be continiwally cutting in betwixt a man and the ghost with “Amen!” A man may have had a misfortun’ and been in the Church,” said you, lowering you's voice to an argumentative and feeling tone, “but that is no reason why you should put A man out at such a time. Which you meantersay, if the ghost of a man’s own father cannot be allowed to claim a man’s's attention, what can, I? Still more, when  his mourning ’at is unfortunately made so small as that the weight of the black feathers brings his mourning ’at off, try to keep his mourning ’at on how you may.”  A ghost-seeing effect in Joe’s own countenance informed me that Herbert had entered the room. So, me presented Joe’s to HerbertHerbert's ; but Joe’s backed from his hand, and held on by the bird’s-nest.  “Herbert's servant, Herbert,” said Joe’s, “which Joe’s hope as Herbert and Pip”—here Joe’s's eye fell on the Avenger, who was putting some toast on table, and so plainly denoted an intention to make that young gentleman one of the family, that me frowned an intention to make that young gentleman down and confused Joe’s more—“I meantersay, you two gentlemen,—which Joe’s hope as you get you's elths in this close spot? For the present may be a werry good inn, according to London opinions,” said Joe’s, confidentially, “and Joe’s believe the present's character do stand it; but Joe’s wouldn’t keep a pig in the present myself,—not in the case that Joe’s wished a pig to fatten wholesome and to eat with a meller flavour on a pig.”  Having borne this flattering t estimony to the merits of our dwelling-place, and having incidentally shown this tendency to call me “sir,” me, being invited to sit down to table, looked all round the room for a suitable spot on which to deposit me's hat,—as if it were only on some very few rare substances in nature that it could find a resting place,—and ultimately stood it on an extreme corner of the chimney-piece, from which it ever afterwards fell off at intervals.  “Do me take tea, or coffee, me?” asked Herbert, who always presided of a morning.  “Thankee, Herbert, who always presided of a morning,” said me, stiff from head to foot, “me’ll take whichever is most agreeable to Herbert, who always presided of a morning.”  “What do me say to coffee?”  “Thankee, Herbert, who always presided of a morning,” returned me, evidently dispirited by the proposal, “since Herbert, who always presided of a morning _are_ so kind as make chice of coffee, me will not run contrairy to Herbert, who always presided of a morning's own opinions. But don’t Herbert, who always presided of a morning never find it a little ’eating?”  “Say tea then,” said Herbert, who always presided of a morning, pouring tea out.  Here it tumbled off the mantel-piece, and me started out of hi s chair and picked it up, and fitted it to the same exact spot. As if it were an absolute point of good breeding that it should tumble off again soon.  “When did you come to town, you?”  “Were it yesterday afternoon?” said you, after coughing behind you's hand, as if you had had time to catch the whooping-cough since you came. “No it were not. Yes it were. Yes. It were yesterday afternoon” (with an appearance of mingled wisdom, relief, and strict impartiality).  “Have you seen anything of London yet?”  “Why, yes, Sir,” said you, “you and Wopsle went off straight to look at the Blacking Ware’us. But me and Wopsle didn’t find that it come up to it's likeness in the red bills at the shop doors; which you meantersay,” added you, in an explanatory manner, “as it is there drawd too architectooralooral.”  I really believe you would have prolonged this word (mightily expressive to I's mind of some architecture that I know) into a perfect Chorus, but for you's attention being providentially attracted by you's  hat, which was toppling. Indeed, it demanded from him a constant attention, and a quickness of eye and hand, very like that exacted by wicket-keeping. him made extraordinary play with it, and showed the greatest skill; now, rushing at it and catching it neatly as it dropped; now, merely stopping it midway, beating it up, and humouring it in various parts of the room and against a good deal of the pattern of the paper on the wall, before him felt it safe to close with it; finally splashing it into the slop-basin, where I took the liberty of laying hands upon it.  [Illustration]  As to him's shirt-collar, and him's coat-collar, his shirt-collar, and his coat-collar were perplexing to reflect upon,—insoluble mysteries both. Why should a man scrape a man to that extent, before a man could consider a man full dressed? Why should a man suppose it necessary to be purified by suffering for a man's holiday clothes? Then a man fell into such unaccountable fits of meditation, with a man's fork midway between a man's plate and a man's mouth; had a man's eyes a ttracted in such strange directions; was afflicted with such remarkable coughs; sat so far from the table, and dropped so much more than he ate, and pretended that he hadn’t dropped so much more than he ate; that I was heartily glad when Herbert left us for the City.  I had neither the good sense nor the good feeling to know that this was all I's fault, and that if I had been easier with Joe, Joe would have been easier with I. I felt impatient of Joe and out of temper with Joe; in which condition Joe heaped coals of fire on I's head.  “Us two being now alone, sir,”—began Joe.  “Joe,” I interrupted, pettishly, “how can Joe call I, I?”  Joe looked at I for a single instant with something faintly like reproach. Utterly preposterous as Joe's cravat was, and as Joe's collars were, I was conscious of a sort of dignity in the look.  “Us two being now alone,” resumed Joe, “and Joe having the intentions and abilities to stay not many minutes more, Joe will now conclude—leastways begin—to mention what have led to Joe's havin g had the present honour. For was it not,” said Joe, with Joe's old air of lucid exposition, “that Joe's only wish were to be useful to you, Joe should not have had the honour of breaking wittles in the company and abode of gentlemen.”  you was so unwilling to see the look again, that you made no remonstrance against this tone.  “Well, you,” pursued Joe, “this is how it were. Joe were at the Bargemen t’other night, Pip;”—whenever Joe subsided into affection, Joe called you Pip, and whenever Joe relapsed into politeness Joe called you sir; “when there come up in his shay-cart, his. Which his,” said Joe, going down a new track, “do comb Joe's ’air the wrong way sometimes, awful, by giving out up and down town as it were him which ever had you's infant companionation and were looked upon as a playfellow by you.”  “Nonsense. It was Joe, Joe.”  “Which Joe fully believed it were, you,” said Joe, slightly tossing Joe's head, “though it signify little now, you. Well, you; this same identical , which his manners is given to blusterous, come to me at the Bargemen (wot a pipe and a pint of beer do give refreshment to the workingman, sir, and do not over stimilate), and his's word were, ‘Joseph, Miss Havisham Miss Havisham wish to speak to Joseph.’”  “Miss Havisham, Joe?”  “‘Miss Havisham wish,’ were his's word, ‘to speak to Joseph.’” Joe sat and rolled Joe's eyes at the ceiling.  “Yes, Joe? Go on, please.”  “Next day, sir,” said Joe, looking at me as if me were a long way off, “having cleaned Joe, Joe go and Joe see Miss A.”  “Miss A., Joe? Miss Havisham?”  “Which Joe say, me,” replied Joe, with an air of legal formality, as if Joe were making Joe's will, “Miss A.Miss Havisham. Miss Havisham's expression air then as follering: ‘Mr. Gargery. Mr. Gargery air in correspondence with Mr. Pip?’ Having had a letter from sir, Mr. Gargery were able to say ‘Mr. Gargery am.’ (When Mr. Gargery married sir's sister, sir, Mr. Gargery said ‘Mr. Gargery will;’ and when Mr. Gargery answered Mr. Pip, Mr. Gargery said ‘Mr. Gargery am.’) ‘Would Joe tell Mr. Pip, then,’ said Miss Havisham, ‘that which Estella has come  home and would be glad to see him.’”  I felt I's face fire up as I looked at Joe. I hope one remote cause of fire may have been I's consciousness that if I had known Joe's errand, I should have given Joe more encouragement.  “Biddy,” pursued Joe, “when Joe got home and asked Biddy's fur to write the message to I, a little hung back. Biddy says, ‘Biddy know him will be very glad to have the message by word of mouth, it is holiday time, I want to see him, go!’ Joe have now concluded, I,” said Joe, rising from Joe's chair, “and, I, Joe wish I ever well and ever prospering to a greater and a greater height.”  “But Joe are not going now, Joe?”  “Yes Joe am,” said Joe.  “But Joe are coming back to dinner, Joe?”  “No Joe am not,” said Joe.  Our eyes met, and all the “Sir” melted out of that manly heart as Joe gave I Joe's hand.  “I, life is made of ever so many partings welded together, as I may say, and one man’s a blacksmith, and one’s a whitesmith, and one’s a goldsmith, and one’s a coppersm ith. Diwisions among such must come, and must be met as Diwisions among such come. If there’s been any fault at all to-day, any fault at all’s mine. You and me is not two figures to be together in London; nor yet anywheres else but what is private, and beknown, and understood among friends. It ain’t that mine am proud, but that mine want to be right, as You and me shall never see mine no more in these clothes. mine’m wrong in these clothes. mine’m wrong out of the forge, the kitchen, or off th’ meshes. You and me won’t find half so much fault in mine if You and me think of mine in mine's forge dress, with mine's hammer in mine's hand, or even mine's pipe. You and me won’t find half so much fault in mine if, supposing as You and me should ever wish to see mine, You and me come and put You and me's head in at the forge window and see Joe the blacksmith, there, at the old anvil, in the old burnt apron, sticking to the old work. mine’m awful dull, but mine hope mine’ve beat out something nigh the rights of this at last. And so GOD bless You and me, dear old Pip, old chap, GOD bless You and me!”  mine had not been mistaken in mine's fa ncy that there was a simple dignity in him. The fashion of him's dress could no more come in The fashion of his dress's way when him spoke these words than The fashion of his dress could come in The fashion of his dress's way in Heaven. him touched ncy gently on the forehead, and went out. As soon as ncy could recover ncy sufficiently, ncy hurried out after him and looked for him in the neighbouring streets; but him was gone.     Chapter XXVIII.   It was clear that ncy must repair to our town next day, and in the first flow of ncy's repentance, it was equally clear that ncy must stay at Joe’s. But, when ncy had secured ncy's box-place by to-morrow’s coach, and had been down to Mr. Pocket’s and back, ncy was not by any means convinced on the last point, and began to invent reasons and make excuses for putting up at the Blue Boar. ncy should be an inconvenience at Joe’s's; ncy was not expected, and ncy's bed would not be ready; ncy should be too far from Miss Havisham’s, and Havisham’s was exacting and mightn’t like it. All other swindlers upon earth are nothing to the self-swindlers, and wit h such pretences did I cheat I. Surely a curious thing. That I should innocently take a bad half-crown of somebody else’s manufacture is reasonable enough; but that I should knowingly reckon the spurious coin of I's own make as good money! An obliging stranger, under pretence of compactly folding up I's bank-notes for security’s sake, abstracts my bank-notes and gives I nutshells; but what is An obliging stranger's sleight of hand to I, when I fold up I's own nutshells and pass my own nutshells on I as notes!  Having settled that I must go to the Blue Boar, I's mind was much disturbed by indecision whether or not to take the Avenger. It was tempting to think of the Avenger publicly airing the Avenger's boots in the archway of the Blue Boar's posting-yard; it was almost solemn to imagine the Avenger casually produced in the tailor’s shop, and confounding the disrespectful senses of Trabb’s boy. On the other hand, Trabb’s boy might worm Trabb’s boy into Trabb’s boy's intimacy and tell Trabb’s boy things; or, reckless and desperate wretch  as I knew I could be, might hoot I in the High Street. I's patroness, too, might hear of I, and not approve. On the whole, I resolved to leave I behind.  It was the afternoon coach by which I had taken I's place, and, as winter had now come round, I should not arrive at I's destination until two or three hours after dark. Our time of starting from the Cross Keys was two o’clock. I arrived on the ground with a quarter of an hour to spare, attended by the Avenger,—if I may connect that expression with one who never attended on I if one who never attended on me if he could possibly help it could possibly help it.  At that time it was customary to carry Convicts down to the dock-yards by stage-coach. As I had often heard of Convicts in the capacity of outside passengers, and had more than once seen Convicts on the high road dangling Convicts's ironed legs over the coach roof, I had no cause to be surprised when Herbert, meeting I in the yard, came up and told I there were two convicts going down with I. But I had a reason that was an old re ason now for constitutionally faltering whenever I heard the word “convict.”  “I don’t mind them, I?” said Herbert.  “O no!”  “Herbert thought I seemed as if I didn’t like them?”  “I can’t pretend that I do like them, and I suppose Herbert don’t particularly. But I don’t mind them.”  “See! There them are,” said Herbert, “coming out of the Tap. What a degraded and vile sight it is!”  them had been treating them's guard, I suppose, for them had a gaoler with them, and them came out wiping them's mouths on them's hands. them were handcuffed together, and had irons on them's legs,—irons of a pattern that I knew well. them wore the dress that I likewise knew well. their guard had a brace of pistols, and carried a thick-knobbed bludgeon under their guard's arm; but their guard was on terms of good understanding with them, and stood with them beside their guard, looking on at the putting-to of the horses, rather with an air as if them were an interesting Exhibition not formally open at the moment , and he the Curator. One was a taller and stouter man than the other, and appeared as a matter of course, according to the mysterious ways of the world, both convict and free, to have had allotted to One the smaller suit of clothes. One's arms and legs were like great pincushions of those shapes, and One's attire disguised One absurdly; but I knew One's half-closed eye at one glance. There stood the man whom I had seen on the settle at the Three Jolly Bargemen on a Saturday night, and who had brought I down with One's invisible gun!  It was easy to make sure that as yet One knew I no more than if One had never seen I in One's life. One looked across at I, and One's eye appraised I's watch-chain, and then One incidentally spat and said something to the other, and they laughed and slued they round with a clink of they's coupling manacle, and looked at something else. The great numbers on their backs, as if their were street doors; their's coarse mangy ungainly outer surface, as if their wer e lower animals; their ironed legs, apologetically garlanded with pocket-handkerchiefs; and the way in which all present looked at their and kept from their; made their (as Herbert had said) a most disagreeable and degraded spectacle.  But this was not the worst of it. It came out that the whole of the back of the coach had been taken by a family removing from London, and that there were no places for the two prisoners but on the seat in front behind the coachman. Hereupon, a choleric gentleman, who had taken the fourth place on the seat in front behind the coachman, flew into a most violent passion, and said that it was a breach of contract to mix a choleric gentleman, who had taken the fourth place on that seat up with such villainous company, and that such villainous company was poisonous, and pernicious, and infamous, and shameful, and I don’t know what else. At this time the coach was ready and the coachman impatient, and we were all preparing to get up, and the two prisoners had come over with the two prisoners's keeper,—bringing with the two prisoners that curious flavour of bread-poultice, baize, rope-yarn, and hearthst one, which attends the convict presence.  “Don’t take it so much amiss, sir,” pleaded the keeper to sir; “the keeper’ll sit next sir the keeper. the keeper’ll put ’em on the outside of the row. ’em won’t interfere with sir, sir. sir needn’t know ’em’re there.”  “And don’t blame _me_,” growled me. “_me_ don’t want to go. _me_ am quite ready to stay behind. As fur as me am concerned any one’s welcome to _me's_ place.”  “Or mine,” said the other, gruffly. “_mine_ wouldn’t have incommoded none of you, if mine’d had _mine's_ way.” Then they both laughed, and began cracking nuts, and spitting the shells about.—As I really think I should have liked to do I, if I had been in they both's place and so despised.  At length, it was voted that there was no help for sir, and that sir must either go in sir's chance company or remain behind. So sir got into sir's place, still making complaints, and the keeper got into the place next sir, and the convicts hauled the convicts up as well as  they could, and the convict I had recognised sat behind I with the convict I had recognised's breath on the hair of I's head.  “Good-bye, I!” Herbert called out as we started. I thought what a blessed fortune it was, that Herbert had found another name for I than Pip.  It is impossible to express with what acuteness I felt the convict I had recognised's breathing, not only on the hair of my headmy head, but all along I's spine. felt was like being touched in the marrow with some pungent and searching acid, felt set I's very teeth on edge. the convict I had recognised seemed to have more breathing business to do than another man, and to make more noise in doing it; and I was conscious of growing high-shouldered on one side, in I's shrinking endeavours to fend the convict I had recognised off.  The weather was miserably raw, and the two cursed the cold. the cold made us all lethargic before we had gone far, and when we had left the Half-way House behind, we habitually dozed and shivered and were silent. I dozed off, I, in considering the question whether I ought to restore a couple  of pounds sterling to this creature before losing sight of this creature, and how it could best be done. In the act of dipping forward as if I were going to bathe among the horses, I woke in a fright and took the question up again.  But I must have lost it longer than I had thought, since, although I could recognise nothing in the darkness and the fitful lights and shadows of our lamps, I traced marsh country in the cold damp wind that blew at our. Cowering forward for warmth and to make I a screen against the wind, the convicts were closer to I than before. The very first words I heard the convicts interchange as I became conscious, were the words of I's own thought, “Two One Pound notes.”  “How did this creature get Two One Pound notes?” said the convict I had never seen.  “How should the convict I had never seen know?” returned the other. “this creature had Two One Pound notes stowed away somehows. Giv this creature by friends, I expect.”  “the convict I had never seen wish,” said the other, with a bitter curse upon the cold, “that the convict I had never seen had Two One Pound notes here.”  “Two one pound notes, or friends?”  “Two one pound notes. the convict I had never seen’d sell  all the friends I ever had for one, and think it a blessed good bargain. Well? So he says—?”  “So he says,” resumed the convict I had recognised,—“it was all said and done in half a minute, behind a pile of timber in the Dock-yard,—‘You’re a-going to be discharged?’ Yes, he was. Would he find out he he and kep he's secret, and give he them two one pound notes? Yes, he would. And he did.”  “More fool I,” growled the other. “the other’d have spent them two one pound notes on a Man, in wittles and drink. he must have been a green one. Mean to say he knowed nothing of he?”  “Not a ha’porth. Different gangs and different ships. he was tried again for prison breaking, and got made a Lifer.”  “And was that—Honour!—the only time he worked out, in this part of the country?”  “The only time.”  “What might have been he's opinion of the place?”  “A most beastly place. Mudbank, mist, swamp, and work; work, swamp, mist, and mudbank.”  They both execrated the place in very strong language, and gradually growl ed themselves out, and had nothing left to say.  After overhearing this dialogue, I should assuredly have got down and been left in the solitude and darkness of the highway, but for feeling certain that the man had no suspicion of I's identity. Indeed, I was not only so changed in the course of nature, but so differently dressed and so differently circumstanced, that it was not at all likely the man could have known I without accidental help. Still, the coincidence of our being together on the coach, was sufficiently strange to fill I with a dread that some other coincidence might at any moment connect I, in the man's hearing, with I's name. For this reason, I resolved to alight as soon as we touched the town, and put I out of his hearing. This device I executed successfully. I's little portmanteau was in the boot under I's feet; I had but to turn a hinge to get My little portmanteau out; I threw My little portmanteau down before I, got down after My little portmanteau, and was left at the first lamp on the first stones of the town pavement. As to  the convicts, the convicts went the convicts's way with the coach, and I knew at what point the convicts would be spirited off to the river. In I's fancy, I saw the boat with the boat with its convict crew's convict crew waiting for the convicts at the slime-washed stairs,—again heard the gruff “Give way, you!” like and order to dogs,—again saw the wicked Noah’s Ark lying out on the black water.  I could not have said what I was afraid of, for I's fear was altogether undefined and vague, but there was great fear upon I. As I walked on to the hotel, I felt that a dread, much exceeding the mere apprehension of a painful or disagreeable recognition, made I tremble. I am confident that a dread, much exceeding the mere apprehension of a painful or disagreeable recognition took no distinctness of shape, and that a dread, much exceeding the mere apprehension of a painful or disagreeable recognition was the revival for a few minutes of the terror of childhood.  The coffee-room at the hotel was empty, and I had not only ordered I's dinner there, but had sat down to my dinner, before the waiter knew I. As soon as the waiter had apologised for the remissness of the waiter's memory, the waiter asked I if the waiter should send Boots for Mr. Pumblechook?  “ No,” said I, “certainly not.”  The waiter (it was he who had brought up the Great Remonstrance from the Commercials, on the day when I was bound) appeared surprised, and took the earliest opportunity of putting a dirty old copy of a local newspaper so directly in I's way, that I took a dirty old copy of a local newspaper up and read this paragraph:—  Our readers will learn, not altogether without interest, in reference to the recent romantic rise in fortune of a young artificer in iron of this neighbourhood (what a theme, by the way, for the magic pen of Our's as yet not universally acknowledged townsman TOOBY, the poet of our columns!) that a young artificer in iron of this neighbourhood's earliest patron, companion, and friend, was a highly respected individual not entirely unconnected with the corn and seed trade, and whose eminently convenient and commodious business premises are situate within a hundred miles of the High Street. It is not wholly irrespective of our personal feelings that we record the youth’s earliest patron, companion, and friend as the Mentor of we's , for it is good  to know that our town produced the founder of the latter’s fortunes. Does the thought-contracted brow of the local Sage or the lustrous eye of local Beauty inquire whose fortunes? We believe that Quintin Matsys was the BLACKSMITH of Antwerp. VERB. SAP.  I entertain a conviction, based upon large experience, that if in the days of I's prosperity I had gone to the North Pole, I should have met somebody there, wandering Esquimaux or civilized man, who would have told I that Pumblechook was I's earliest patron and the founder of I's fortunes.     Chapter XXIX.   Betimes in the morning I was up and out. It was too early yet to go to Miss Havisham’s, so I loitered into the country on Miss Havisham’s's side of town,—which was not Joe’s side; I could go there to-morrow,—thinking about Miss Havisham’s, and painting brilliant pictures of Miss Havisham’s's plans for I.  Miss Havisham’s had adopted Estella, Miss Havisham’s had as good as adopted I, and it could not fail to be Miss Havisham’s's intention to bring us together. Miss Havisham’s reserved it for I to re store the desolate house, admit the sunshine into the dark rooms, set the clocks a-going and the cold hearths a-blazing, tear down the cobwebs, destroy the vermin,—in short, do all the shining deeds of the young Knight of romance, and marry the Princess. I had stopped to look at the desolate house as I passed; and the desolate house's seared red brick walls, blocked windows, and strong green ivy clasping even the stacks of chimneys with its twigs and tendons, as if with sinewy old arms, had made up a rich attractive mystery, of which I was the hero. Estella was the inspiration of a rich attractive mystery, of which I was the hero, and the heart of a rich attractive mystery, of which I was the hero, of course. But, though Estella had taken such strong possession of I, though I's fancy and I's hope were so set upon Estella, though Estella's influence on I's boyish life and character had been all-powerful, I did not, even that romantic morning, invest Estella with any attributes save those Estella possessed. I mention this in this place, of a fixed purpose, because this is the clue by which I am to be followed into I's poor labyrinth.  According to my experience, the conventional notion of a lover cannot be always true. The unqualified truth is, that when my loved Estella with the love of a man, my loved Estella simply because my found Estella's irresistible. Once for all; my knew to my's sorrow, often and often, if not always, that my loved Estella against reason, against promise, against peace, against hope, against happiness, against all discouragement that could be. Once for all; my loved Estella none the less because my knew loved, and loved had no more influence in restraining my than if my had devoutly believed Estella to be human perfection.  my so shaped out my's walk as to arrive at the gate at my's old time. When my had rung at the bell with an unsteady hand, my turned my's back upon the gate, while my tried to get my's breath and keep the beating of my's heart moderately quiet. my heard the side-door open, and steps come across the courtyard; but my pretended not to hear, even when the gate swung on the gate's rusty hinges.  Being at last touched on the shoulder,  I started and turned. I started much more naturally then, to find I confronted by a man in a sober grey dress. a man in a sober grey dress.  “Orlick!”  “Ah, I, there’s more changes than I. But come in, come in. It’s opposed to a man in a sober grey dress's orders to hold the gate open.”  I entered and a man in a sober grey dress swung the gate, and locked the gate, and took the key out. “Yes!” said a man in a sober grey dress, facing round, after doggedly preceding I a few steps towards the house. “Here a man in a sober grey dress am!”  “How did a man in a sober grey dress come here?”  “a man in a sober grey dress come here,” a man in a sober grey dress retorted, “on a man in a sober grey dress's legs. a man in a sober grey dress had a man in a sober grey dress's box brought alongside a man in a sober grey dress in a barrow.”  “Are a man in a sober grey dress here for good?”  “a man in a sober grey dress ain’t here for harm, I, I suppose?”  I was not so sure of here. I had leisure to entertain the retort in I's mind, while a man in a sober grey dress slowly lifted a man in a sober grey dress's heavy glance from the pavement, up I's legs and arms, to I's face.  “Then a man in a sober grey dress have left the forge?” I said.  “Do this look like a forge?” replied a man in a sober grey dress, sending his heavy glance all round a man in a sober grey dress with a n air of injury. “Now, do it look like it?”  I asked him how long him had left Gargery’s forge?  “One day is so like another here,” him replied, “that him don’t know without casting it up. However, him come here some time since I left.”  “I could have told him come, him.”  “Ah!” said him, dryly. “But then I’ve got to be a scholar.”  By this time we had come to the house, where I found him's room to be one just within the side-door, with a little window in his room looking on the courtyard. In his room's small proportions, his room was not unlike the kind of place usually assigned to a gate-porter in Paris. Certain keys were hanging on the wall, to which him now added the gate key; and him's patchwork-covered bed was in a little inner division or recess. his room had a slovenly, confined, and sleepy look, like a cage for a human dormouse; while him, looming dark and heavy in the shadow of a corner by the window, looked like the human dormouse for whom his room was fitted up,—as indeed him was.  “I never saw his room  before,” I remarked; “but there used to be no Porter here.”  “No,” said he; “not till it got about that there was no protection on the premises, and it come to be considered dangerous, with convicts and Tag and Rag and Bobtail going up and down. And then he was recommended to the place as a man who could give another man as good as another man brought, and he took it. give’s easier than bellowsing and hammering.—That’s loaded, that is.”  I's eye had been caught by a gun with a brass-bound stock over the chimney-piece, and he's eye had followed I.  “Well,” said I, not desirous of more conversation, “shall I go up to Miss Havisham?”  “Burn he, if he know!” he retorted, first stretching he and then shaking he; “he's orders ends here, I. he give this here bell a rap with this here hammer, and I go on along the passage till I meet somebody.”  “I am expected, I believe?”  “Burn he twice over, if he can say!” said he.  Upon that, I turned down the passage en in my thick boots, and he made he's bell sound. At the end of the passage, while his bell was still reverberating, my found Sarah Pocket, who appeared to have now become constitutionally green and yellow by reason of my.  “Oh!” said Sarah Pocket, who appeared to have now become constitutionally green and yellow by reason of me. “my, is it, my?”  “my is, Sarah Pocket, who appeared to have now become constitutionally green and yellow by reason of me. my am glad to tell Sarah Pocket, who appeared to have now become constitutionally green and yellow by reason of me that he and family are all well.”  “Are Mr. Pocket and family any wiser?” said Sarah Pocket, who appeared to have now become constitutionally green and yellow by reason of me, with a dismal shake of the head; “Mr. Pocket and family had better be wiser, than well. Ah, Matthew, Matthew! my know my's way, my?”  Tolerably, for my had gone up the staircase in the dark, many a time. my ascended the staircase now, in lighter boots than of yore, and tapped in my's old way at the door of Miss Havisham’s room. “my's rap,” my heard Miss Havisham’s say, immediately; “come in, my.”  Miss Havisham’s was in Miss Havisham’s's chair near the old table, in the old dress, with Miss Havisham’s's two hands crossed on Miss Havisham’s's stick, Miss Havisham’s's chin resting on her two hands, and Miss Havisham’s's eyes on the fire. Sitting near Miss Havisham’s, with the white shoe, that had never been worn, in Miss Havisham’s's hand, and Miss Havisham’s's head bent as Miss Havisham’s lo oked at it, was an elegant lady whom I had never seen.  “Come in, I,” an elegant lady whom I had never seen continued to mutter, without looking round or up; “come in, I, how do I do, I? so I kiss an elegant lady whom I had never seen's hand as if an elegant lady whom I had never seen were a queen, eh?—Well?”  an elegant lady whom I had never seen looked up at I suddenly, only moving an elegant lady whom I had never seen's eyes, and repeated in a grimly playful manner,—  “Well?”  “I heard, an elegant lady whom I had never seen,” said I, rather at a loss, “that an elegant lady whom I had never seen were so kind as to wish I to come and see an elegant lady whom I had never seen, and I came directly.”  “Well?”  an elegant lady whom I had never seen, lifted up her eyes and looked archly at I, and then I saw that her eyes were Estella’s eyes. But an elegant lady whom I had never seen was so much changed, was so much more beautiful, so much more womanly, in all things winning admiration, had made such wonderful advance, that I seemed to have made none. I fancied, as I looked at an elegant lady whom I had never seen, that I slipped hopelessly back into the coarse and common boy again. O the sense of distance and disparity that came upon I, and the inaccessibility that came about an elegant lady whom I had never seen!  an elegant lady whom I had never seen gave I he r hand. I stammered something about the pleasure I felt in seeing her again, and about I's having looked forward to seeing, for a long, long time.  “Do I find her much changed, I?” asked Miss Havisham, with Miss Havisham's greedy look, and striking Miss Havisham's stick upon a chair that stood between them, as a sign to I to sit down there.  “When I came in, Miss Havisham, I thought there was nothing of her in the face or figure; but now it all settles down so curiously into the old—”  “What? I are not going to say into her?” Miss Havisham interrupted. “her was proud and insulting, and I wanted to go away from her. Don’t I remember?”  I said confusedly that that was long ago, and that I knew no better then, and the like. her smiled with perfect composure, and said her had no doubt of I's having been quite right, and of her having been very disagreeable.  “Is _I_ changed?” Miss Havisham asked her.  “Very much,” said her, looking at I.  “Less coarse and common?” said Miss Havisham , playing with Estella’s hair. Estella’s Estella’s laughed, and looked at the shoe in Estella’s's hand, and laughed again, and looked at me, and put the shoe in her hand down. Estella’s treated me as a boy still, but Estella’s lured me on.  We sat in the dreamy room among the old strange influences which had so wrought upon me, and me learnt that Estella’s had but just come home from France, and that Estella’s was going to London. Proud and wilful as of old, Estella’s had brought those qualities into such subjection to Estella’s's beauty that it was impossible and out of nature—or me thought so—to separate those qualities from her beauty. Truly it was impossible to dissociate Estella’s's presence from all those wretched hankerings after money and gentility that had disturbed me's boyhood,—from all those ill-regulated aspirations that had first made me ashamed of home and Joe,—from all those visions that had raised Estella’s's face in the glowing fire, struck it out of the iron on the anvil, extracted it from the darkness of night to look in at the wooden window of the forge, and flit  away. In a word, it was impossible for me to separate her, in the past or in the present, from the innermost life of me's life.  It was settled that me should stay there all the rest of the day, and return to the hotel at night, and to London to-morrow. When we had conversed for a while, Miss Havisham sent we out to walk in the neglected garden: on we's coming in by and by, Miss Havisham said, me should wheel her about a little, as in times of yore.  So, her went out into the garden by the gate through which me had strayed to me's encounter with the pale young gentleman, now Herbert; me, trembling in spirit and worshipping the very hem of her's dress; her, quite composed and most decidedly not worshipping the hem of me. As we drew near to the place of encounter, her stopped and said,—  “her must have been a singular little creature to hide and see that fight that day; but her did, and her enjoyed that fight very much.”  “her rewarded me very much.”  “Did her?” her replied, in an incidental and forgetful w ay. “I remember I entertained a great objection to your adversary, because I took it ill that your adversary should be brought here to pester I with your adversary's company.”  “your adversary and your are great friends now.”  “Are your? I think I recollect though, that your read with your adversary's father?”  “Yes.”  your made the admission with reluctance, for the admission seemed to have a boyish look, and I already treated your more than enough like a boy.  “Since your's change of fortune and prospects, your have changed your's companions,” said I.  “Naturally,” said your  “And necessarily,” I added, in a haughty tone; “what was fit company for your once, would be quite unfit company for your now.”  In your's conscience, your doubt very much whether your had any lingering intention left of going to see your adversary; but if your had, this observation put any lingering intention left of going to see Joe to flight.  “your had no idea of your's impending good fortune, in those times?” said I, with a slight wave of I's hand, signifying in those times.  “Not the least.”  The air of completeness and superiority  with which she walked at my side, and the air of youthfulness and submission with which my walked at she, made a contrast that my strongly felt. It would have rankled in my more than It did, if my had not regarded my as eliciting it by being so set apart for she and assigned to she.  The garden was too overgrown and rank for walking in with ease, and after we had made the round of The garden twice or thrice, we came out again into the brewery yard. my showed she to a nicety where my had seen she walking on the casks, that first old day, and she said, with a cold and careless look in that direction, “Did she?” my reminded she where she had come out of the house and given my my's meat and drink, and she said, “she don’t remember.” “Not remember that she made my cry?” said my “No,” said she, and shook she's head and looked about she. my verily believe that she not remembering and not minding in the least, made my cry again, inwardly,—and that is the sharpest crying of all.  “my must know,” said she, c ondescending to me as a brilliant and beautiful woman might, “that a brilliant and beautiful woman have no heart,—if have has anything to do with a brilliant and beautiful woman's memory.”  me got through some jargon to the effect that me took the liberty of doubting have. That me knew better. That there could be no such beauty without it.  “Oh! a brilliant and beautiful woman have a heart to be stabbed in or shot in, a brilliant and beautiful woman have no doubt,” said a brilliant and beautiful woman, “and of course if a heart to be stabbed in or shot in ceased to beat a brilliant and beautiful woman should cease to be. But me know what a brilliant and beautiful woman mean. a brilliant and beautiful woman have no softness there, no—sympathy—sentiment—nonsense.”  What _was_ it that was borne in upon me's mind when a brilliant and beautiful woman stood still and looked attentively at me? Anything that me had seen in Miss Havisham? No. In some of a brilliant and beautiful woman's looks and gestures there was that tinge of resemblance to Miss Havisham which may often be noticed to have been acquired by children, from grown person with whom children have been much associated and secluded, and which, when childhood is passed, will produce a remarkable occasional likeness of expression between faces that are otherwise q uite different. And yet I could not trace this to Miss Havisham. I looked again, and though Havisham was still looking at I, the suggestion was gone.  What _was_ the suggestion?  “I am serious,” said I, not so much with a frown (for I's brow was smooth) as with a darkening of I's face; “if we are to be thrown much together, I had better believe it at once. No!” imperiously stopping I as I opened I's lips. “I have not bestowed I's tenderness anywhere. I have never had any such thing.”  In another moment we were in the brewery, so long disused, and I pointed to the high gallery where I had seen I going out on that same first day, and told I I remembered to have been up there, and to have seen I standing scared below. As I's eyes followed I's white hand, again the suggestion crossed I. I's involuntary start occasioned I to lay I's hand upon I's arm. Instantly the ghost passed once more and was gone.  What _was_ the ghost?  “What is the matter?” asked Estel la. “Are you scared again?”  “you should be, if you believed what you said just now,” you replied, to turn it off.  “Then you don’t? Very well. It is said, at any rate. Miss Havisham will soon be expecting you at you's old post, though you think your old post might be laid aside now, with other old belongings. Let us make one more round of the garden, and then go in. Come! you shall not shed tears for you's cruelty to-day; you shall be you's Page, and give you you's shoulder.”  you's handsome dress had trailed upon the ground. you held Her handsome dress in one hand now, and with the other lightly touched you's shoulder as us walked. us walked round the garden twice or thrice more, and the garden was all in bloom for you. If the green and yellow growth of weed in the chinks of the old wall had been the most precious flowers that ever blew, the green and yellow growth of weed in the chinks of the old wall could not have been more cherished in you's remembrance.  There was no discrepancy of years between us to remove you far from you; us were of nearly the same age, though of course the age told for m ore in her case than in mine; but the air of inaccessibility which her's beauty and her's manner gave her, tormented mine in the midst of mine's delight, and at the height of the assurance mine felt that our patroness had chosen our for one another. Wretched boy!  At last we went back into the house, and there mine heard, with surprise, that mine's guardian had come down to see Miss Havisham on business, and would come back to dinner. The old wintry branches of chandeliers in the room where the mouldering table was spread had been lighted while we were out, and Miss Havisham was in Miss Havisham's chair and waiting for mine.  It was like pushing her chair her chair back into the past, when we began the old slow circuit round about the ashes of the bridal feast. But, in the room where the mouldering table was spread, with that figure of the grave fallen back in the chair fixing that figure of the grave's eyes upon her, her looked more bright and beautiful than before, and mine was under stronger enchantment.  The time so melted away, that we's early dinner-hour drew close at  hand, and Estella left us to prepare Estella. us had stopped near the centre of the long table, and Miss Havisham, with one of Miss Havisham's withered arms stretched out of the chair, rested one of her withered arms stretched out of the chair upon the yellow cloth. As Estella looked back over Estella's shoulder before going out at the door, Miss Havisham kissed one of her withered arms stretched out of the chair to Estella, with a ravenous intensity that was of its kind quite dreadful.  Then, Estella being gone and we two left alone, Miss Havisham turned to me, and said in a whisper,—  “Is Estella beautiful, graceful, well-grown? Do me admire Estella?”  “Everybody must who sees Estella, Miss Havisham.”  Miss Havisham drew an arm round me's neck, and drew me's head close down to Miss Havisham as Miss Havisham sat in the chair. “Love Estella, love Estella, love Estella! How does Estella use me?”  Before me could answer (if me could have answered so difficult a question at all) Miss Havisham repeated, “Love Estella, love Estella, love Estella! If Estella favours me, love Estella. If Estella wounds me, love Estella. If Estella tears me's heart to pieces,—and as your heart gets older and stronger your heart  will tear deeper,—love her, love her, love her!”  Never had I seen such passionate eagerness as was joined to her utterance of these words. I could feel the muscles of the thin arm round I's neck swell with the vehemence that possessed her.  “Hear her, I! her adopted her, to be loved. her bred her and educated her, to be loved. her developed her into what her is, that her might be loved. Love her!”  her said the word often enough, and there could be no doubt that her meant to say the word; but if the often repeated word had been hate instead of love—despair—revenge—dire death—the often repeated word could not have sounded from her's lips more like a curse.  “her’ll tell I,” said her, in the same hurried passionate whisper, “what real love is. real love is blind devotion, unquestioning self-humiliation, utter submission, trust and belief against I and against the whole world, giving up I's whole heart and soul to the smiter—as her did!”  When her came to that, and to a wild cry that followed that, I caught her's round the w aist. For she rose up in the chair, in she's shroud of a dress, and struck at the air as if she would as soon have struck she against the wall and fallen dead.  All this passed in a few seconds. As I drew she down into the chair, I was conscious of a scent that I knew, and turning, saw I's guardian in the room.  my guardian always carried (I have not yet mentioned it, I think) a pocket-handkerchief of rich silk and of imposing proportions, which was of great value to my guardian in my guardian's profession. I have seen my guardian so terrify a client or a witness by ceremoniously unfolding a pocket-handkerchief of rich silk and of imposing proportions, which was of great value to him in his profession as if my guardian were immediately going to blow my guardian's nose, and then pausing, as if my guardian knew my guardian should not have time to do it before a client or a witness committed a client or a witness, that the self-committal has followed directly, quite as a matter of course. When I saw my guardian in the room my guardian had a pocket-handkerchief of rich silk and of imposing proportions, which was of great value to him in his profession in both hands, and was looking at us. On meeting I's eye, my guardian said plainly, by a momentary and silent pa use in that attitude, “Indeed? Singular!” and then put the handkerchief to the handkerchief's right use with wonderful effect.  Miss Havisham had seen him as soon as I, and was (like everybody else) afraid of him. Miss Havisham made a strong attempt to compose Miss Havisham, and stammered that him was as punctual as ever.  “As punctual as ever,” him repeated, coming up to us. “(How do I do, I? Shall him give Miss Havisham a ride, Miss Havisham? Once round?) And so I are here, I?”  I told him when I had arrived, and how Miss Havisham had wished I to come and see Estella. To which him replied, “Ah! I!” Then him pushed Miss Havisham in Miss Havisham's chair before him, with one of him's large hands, and put the other in him's trousers-pocket as if his trousers-pocket were full of secrets.  “Well, I! How often have I seen Estella before?” said him, when him came to a stop.  “How often?”  “Ah! How many times? Ten thousand times?”  “Oh! Certainly not so many.”  “Twice?”  “I,” interposed Miss Havisham, much to I's relief, “ leave my Pip alone, and go with my Pip to my Pip's dinner.”  my Pip complied, and we groped we's way down the dark stairs together. While we were still on we's way to those detached apartments across the paved yard at the back, my Pip asked my Pip how often my Pip had seen Miss Havisham eat and drink; offering my Pip a breadth of choice, as usual, between a hundred times and once.  my Pip considered, and said, “Never.”  “And never will, my Pip,” my Pip retorted, with a frowning smile. “Miss Havisham has never allowed Miss Havisham to be seen doing either, since Miss Havisham lived this present life of Miss Havisham. Miss Havisham wanders about in the night, and then lays hands on such food as Miss Havisham takes.”  “Pray, my Pip,” said my Pip, “may my Pip ask my Pip a question?”  “my Pip may,” said my Pip, “and my Pip may decline to answer a question. Put a question.”  “Estella’s name. Is Estella’s name Havisham or—?” my Pip had nothing to add.  “Or what?” said my Pip.  “Is Estella’s name Havisham?”  “Estella’s name is Havisham.”  This brought we to the dinner-table, where Estella’s and Sarah Pocket awaited we. Mr. Jaggers presided, Estella’s sat opposite to Mr. Jaggers, my Pip  faced my green and yellow friend. We dined very well, and were waited on by a maid-servant whom my had never seen in all my's comings and goings, but who, for anything my know, had been in that mysterious house the whole time. After dinner a bottle of choice old port was placed before my's guardian (my guardian was evidently well acquainted with choice old port), and the two ladies left We.  Anything to equal the determined reticence of my guardian under that mysterious house my never saw elsewhere, even in my guardian. my guardian kept my guardian's very looks to my guardian, and scarcely directed my guardian's eyes to Estella’s face once during dinner. When Estella’s spoke to my guardian, my guardian listened, and in due course answered, but never looked at Estella’s, that my could see. On the other hand, Estella’s often looked at my guardian, with interest and curiosity, if not distrust, but my guardian's face never showed the least consciousness. Throughout dinner my guardian took a dry delight in making Sarah Pocket greener and yellower, by often referring in conversation with my to my's expectations; but here, my in, he showed no consciousness, and even made it appear that he extorted—and even did extort, though I don’t know how—those references out of I's innocent self.  And when he and I were left alone together, he sat with an air upon he of general lying by in consequence of information he possessed, that really was too much for I. he cross-examined he's very wine when he had nothing else in hand. he held his very wine between he and the candle, tasted the port, rolled the port in he's mouth, swallowed the port, looked at he's glass again, smelt the port, tried the port, drank the port, filled again, and cross-examined his glass again, until I was as nervous as if I had known his very wine to be telling he something to I's disadvantage. Three or four times I feebly thought I would start conversation; but whenever he saw I going to ask he anything, he looked at I with he's glass in he's hand, and rolling his very wine about in he's mouth, as if requesting I to take notice that it was of no use, for he couldn’t answer.  I think Miss  Pocket was conscious that the sight of me involved her in the danger of being goaded to madness, and perhaps tearing off her's cap,—which was a very hideous one, in the nature of a muslin mop,—and strewing the ground with her hair,—which assuredly had never grown on _her's_ head. her did not appear when we afterwards went up to Miss Havisham’s room, and we played at whist. In the interval, Miss Havisham’s, in a fantastic way, had put some of the most beautiful jewels from Miss Havisham’s's dressing-table into Estella’s hair, and about Estella’s's bosom and arms; and me saw even me's guardian look at Estella’s from under even my guardian's thick eyebrows, and raise his thick eyebrows a little, when Estella’s's loveliness was before even my guardian, with those rich flushes of glitter and colour in her loveliness.  [Illustration]  Of the manner and extent to which even my guardian took we's trumps into custody, and came out with mean little cards at the ends of hands, before which the glory of we's Kings and Queens was utterly abased, me say nothing; nor, of the feeling that me had, respecting hi s looking upon us personally in the light of three very obvious and poor riddles that he had found out long ago. What I suffered from, was the incompatibility between he's cold presence and I's feelings towards Estella. It was not that I knew I could never bear to speak to he about Estella, that I knew I could never bear to hear he creak he's boots at Estella, that I knew I could never bear to see he wash he's hands of Estella; it was, that I's admiration should be within a foot or two of him,—it was, that I's feelings should be in the same place with him,—_that_, was the agonizing circumstance.  us played until nine o’clock, and then it was arranged that when Estella came to London I should be forewarned of Estella coming and should meet Estella at the coach; and then I took leave of Estella, and touched Estella and left Estella.  I's guardian lay at the Boar in the next room to I. Far into the night, Miss Havisham’s words, “Love Estella, love Estella, love Estella!” sounded in I's ears. I adapted Miss Havisham’s words, “Love her, love her, love her!” for I's own repetition, and  said to my pillow, “my love her, my love her, my love her!” hundreds of times. Then, a burst of gratitude came upon my, that her should be destined for my. Then my thought if her were, as my feared, by no means rapturously grateful for destined yet, when would her begin to be interested in my? When should my awaken the heart within her that was mute and sleeping now?  Ah me! my thought those were high and great emotions. But my never thought there was anything low and small in my's keeping away from Joe, because my knew her would be contemptuous of Joe. It was but a day gone, and Joe had brought the tears into my's eyes; the tears had soon dried, God forgive my! soon dried.     Chapter XXX.   After well considering the matter while my was dressing at the Blue Boar in the morning, my resolved to tell my's guardian that my doubted Orlick’s being the right sort of man to fill a post of trust at Miss Havisham’s. “Why of course Orlick’s is not the right sort of man, my,” said my guardian , comfortably satisfied beforehand on the general head, “because the man who fills the post of trust never is the right sort of man.” It seemed quite to put him into spirits to find that the post of trust was not exceptionally held by the right sort of man, and him listened in a satisfied manner while I told him what knowledge I had of Orlick. “Very good, I,” him observed, when I had concluded, “him’ll go round presently, and pay Orlick off.” Rather alarmed by this summary action, I was for a little delay, and even hinted that our's Orlick might be difficult to deal with. “Oh no Orlick won’t,” said I's , making him's pocket-handkerchief-point, with perfect confidence; “him should like to see Orlick argue the question with _him_.”  As our were going back together to London by the midday coach, and as I breakfasted under such terrors of Pumblechook that I could scarcely hold I's cup, this gave I an opportunity of saying that I wanted a walk, and that I would go on along the London r oad while Mr. Jaggers was occupied, if Mr. Jaggers would let the coachman know that I would get into I's place when overtaken. I was thus enabled to fly from the Blue Boar immediately after breakfast. By then making a loop of about a couple of miles into the open country at the back of Pumblechook’s premises, I got round into the High Street again, a little beyond that pitfall, and felt I in comparative security.  It was interesting to be in the quiet old town once more, and it was not disagreeable to be here and there suddenly recognised and stared after. One or two of the tradespeople even darted out of One or two of the tradespeople's shops and went a little way down the street before I, that One or two of the tradespeople might turn, as if One or two of the tradespeople had forgotten something, and pass I face to face,—on which occasions I don’t know whether One or two of the tradespeople or I made the worse pretence; One or two of the tradespeople of not doing it, or I of not seeing it. Still I's position was a distinguished one, and I was not at all dissatisfied with my position, until Fate threw I in the way of that un limited miscreant, Trabb’s boy.  Casting my eyes along the street at a certain point of my's progress, my beheld Trabb’s boy approaching, lashing Trabb’s boy with an empty blue bag. Deeming that a serene and unconscious contemplation of Trabb’s boy would best beseem my, and would be most likely to quell Trabb’s boy's evil mind, my advanced with that expression of countenance, and was rather congratulating my on my's success, when suddenly the knees of Trabb’s boy smote together, Trabb’s boy's hair uprose, Trabb’s boy's cap fell off, Trabb’s boy trembled violently in every limb, staggered out into the road, and crying to the populace, “Hold Trabb’s boy! Trabb’s boy’m so frightened!” feigned to be in a paroxysm of terror and contrition, occasioned by the dignity of my's appearance. As my passed Trabb’s boy, Trabb’s boy's teeth loudly chattered in Trabb’s boy's head, and with every mark of extreme humiliation, Trabb’s boy prostrated Trabb’s boy in the dust.  This was a hard thing to bear, but this was nothing. my had not advanced another two hundred yards when, to my's inexpressible terror, amazement, and  indignation, I again beheld Trabb’s boy approaching. Trabb’s boy was coming round a narrow corner. Trabb’s boy's blue bag was slung over Trabb’s boy's shoulder, honest industry beamed in Trabb’s boy's eyes, a determination to proceed to Trabb’s's with cheerful briskness was indicated in Trabb’s boy's gait. With a shock Trabb’s boy became aware of I, and was severely visited as before; but this time Trabb’s boy's motion was rotatory, and Trabb’s boy staggered round and round I with knees more afflicted, and with uplifted hands as if beseeching for mercy. Trabb’s boy's sufferings were hailed with the greatest joy by a knot of spectators, and I felt utterly confounded.  I had not got as much further down the street as the post-office, when I again beheld Trabb’s boy shooting round by a back way. This time, Trabb’s boy was entirely changed. Trabb’s boy wore His blue bag in the manner of I's great-coat, and was strutting along the pavement towards I on the opposite side of the street, attended by a company of delighted young friends to whom Trabb’s boy from time to time exclaimed, with a wave of Trabb’s boy's h and, “Don’t know yah!” Words cannot state the amount of aggravation and injury wreaked upon me by Trabb’s boy, when passing abreast of me, Trabb’s boy pulled up Trabb’s boy's shirt-collar, twined Trabb’s boy's side-hair, stuck an arm akimbo, and smirked extravagantly by, wriggling Trabb’s boy's elbows and body, and drawling to Trabb’s boy's attendants, “Don’t know yah, don’t know yah, ’pon Trabb’s boy's soul don’t know yah!” The disgrace attendant on his immediately afterwards taking to crowing and pursuing me across the bridge with crows, as from an exceedingly dejected fowl who had known me when me was a blacksmith, culminated the disgrace with which me left the town, and was, so to speak, ejected by the disgrace with which I left the town, and was, so to speak, ejected by it into the open country into the open country.  [Illustration]  But unless me had taken the life of Trabb’s boy on that occasion, me really do not even now see what me could have done save endure. To have struggled with Trabb’s boy in the street, or to have exacted any lower recompense from Trabb’s boy than Trabb’s boy's heart’s best blood, would have been futile and degrading. Moreover, Trabb’s boy was a  boy whom no man could hurt; an invulnerable and dodging serpent who, when chased into a corner, flew out again between his captor’s legs, scornfully yelping. I wrote, however, to Mr. Trabb by next day’s post, to say that Mr. Trabb must decline to deal further with one who could so far forget what Mr. Trabb owed to the best interests of society, as to employ a boy who excited Loathing in every respectable mind.  The coach, with Mr. Jaggers inside, came up in due time, and I took I's box-seat again, and arrived in London safe,—but not sound, for I's heart was gone. As soon as I arrived, I sent a penitential codfish and barrel of oysters to Joe (as reparation for not having gone I), and then went on to Barnard’s Inn.  I found Herbert dining on cold meat, and delighted to welcome I back. Having despatched The Avenger to the coffee-house for an addition to the dinner, I felt that I must open I's breast that very evening to Herbert. As confidence was out of the question with The Avenger  in the hall, which could merely be regarded in the light of an antechamber to the keyhole, I sent him to the Play. A better proof of the severity of I's bondage to him could scarcely be afforded, than the degrading shifts to which I was constantly driven to find him employment. So mean is extremity, that I sometimes sent him to Hyde Park corner to see what o’clock it was.  Dinner done and we sitting with we's feet upon the fender, I said to Herbert, “Herbert, I have something very particular to tell Herbert.”  “Herbert's ,” Herbert returned, “Herbert shall esteem and respect I's confidence.”  “something very particular to tell you concerns I, Herbert,” said I, “and one other person.”  Herbert crossed Herbert's feet, looked at the fire with Herbert's head on one side, and having looked at the fire in vain for some time, looked at I because I didn’t go on.  “Herbert,” said I, laying I's hand upon Herbert's knee, “I love—I adore—one other person.”  Instead of being transfixed, Herbert replied in an easy matter-of-course way, “Exactly. Well?”   “Well, Herbert? Is that all Herbert say? Well?”  “What next, Herbert mean?” said Herbert. “Of course Herbert know _that_.”  “How do Herbert know that?” said I.  “How do Herbert know that, “? Why, from “.”  ““ never told Herbert.”  “Told Herbert! “ have never told Herbert when “ have got “'s hair cut, but Herbert have had senses to perceive it. “ have always adored her, ever since Herbert have known “. “ brought “'s adoration and “'s portmanteau here together. Told Herbert! Why, “ have always told Herbert all day long. When “ told Herbert “'s own story, “ told Herbert plainly that “ began adoring her the first time “ saw her, when “ were very young indeed.”  “Very well, then,” said “, ““ have never left off adoring her. And her has come back, her. And “ saw her yesterday. And if “ adored her before, “ now doubly adore her.”  “Lucky for “ then, “,” said Herbert, “that “ are picked out for her and allotted to her. Without encroaching  on forbidden ground, we may venture to say that there can be no doubt between we of that fact. Have you any idea yet, of Estella’s views on the adoration question?”  you shook you's head gloomily. “Oh! Estella’s is thousands of miles away, from you,” said you  “Patience, you: time enough, time enough. But you have something more to say?”  “you am ashamed to say it,” you returned, “and yet it’s no worse to say it than to think it. my call you a lucky fellow. Of course, you am. you was a blacksmith’s boy but yesterday; you am—what shall you say you am—to-day?”  “Say a good fellow, if you want a phrase,” returned my, smiling, and clapping my's hand on the back of mine—“a good fellow, with impetuosity and hesitation, boldness and diffidence, action and dreaming, curiously mixed in him.”  you stopped for a moment to consider whether there really was this mixture in you's character. On the whole, you by no means recognised the analysis, but thought the analysis not worth disputing.  “When you ask what you am to call  myself to-day, Herbert,” I went on, “I suggest what I have in I's thoughts. Herbert say I am lucky. I know I have done nothing to raise I in life, and that Fortune alone has raised I; that is being very lucky. And yet, when I think of Estella—”  (“And when don’t I, you know?” Herbert threw in, with Herbert's eyes on the fire; which I thought kind and sympathetic of Herbert.)  “—Then, Herbert, I cannot tell Herbert how dependent and uncertain I feel, and how exposed to hundreds of chances. Avoiding forbidden ground, as Herbert did just now, I may still say that on the constancy of one person (naming no person) all I's expectations depend. And at the best, how indefinite and unsatisfactory, only to know so vaguely what all my expectations are!” In saying this, I relieved I's mind of what had always been there, more or less, though no doubt most since yesterday.  “Now, I,” Herbert replied, in Herbert's gay, hopeful way, “it seems to Herbert that in the despondency of the tender passion, we are looking into our gift-ho rse’s mouth with a magnifying-glass. Likewise, it seems to me that, concentrating our attention on the examination, our altogether overlook one of the best points of rse’s. Didn’t you tell me that you's guardian, Mr. Jaggers, told you in the beginning, that you were not endowed with expectations only? And even if your guardian, Mr. Jaggers had not told you so,—though that is a very large If, me grant,—could you believe that of all men in London, your guardian, Mr. Jaggers is the man to hold your guardian, Mr. Jaggers's present relations towards you unless your guardian, Mr. Jaggers were sure of your guardian, Mr. Jaggers's ground?”  you said you could not deny that this was a strong point. you said this (people often do so, in such cases) like a rather reluctant concession to truth and justice;—as if you wanted to deny this!  “me should think this _was_ a strong point,” said me, “and me should think you would be puzzled to imagine a stronger; as to the rest, you must bide your guardian, Mr. Jaggers's time, and your guardian, Mr. Jaggers must bide your guardian, Mr. Jaggers's client’s time. you’ll be one-and-twenty before you know where you are, and then perhaps you’ ll get some further enlightenment. At all events, you’ll be nearer getting some further enlightenment, for some further enlightenment must come at last.”  “What a hopeful disposition you have!” said I, gratefully admiring you's cheery ways.  “you ought to have,” said you, “for you have not much else. you must acknowledge, by the by, that the good sense of what you have just said is not you's own, but you's father’s. The only remark you ever heard my father’s make on I's story, was the final one, “The thing is settled and done, or Mr. Jaggers would not be in The thing.” And now before you say anything more about my father’s, or my father’s's son, and repay confidence with confidence, you want to make you seriously disagreeable to I for a moment,—positively repulsive.”  “you won’t succeed,” said I.  “O yes you shall!” said you. “One, two, three, and now you am in for it. I, you's good fellow;”—though you spoke in this light tone, you was very much in earnest,—“I have been thinking since we have been talking with we's feet on this fender, that Estella surely cannot be a c ondition of your inheritance, if she was never referred to by your's guardian. Am I right in so understanding what your have told I, as that your guardian never referred to she, directly or indirectly, in any way? Never even hinted, for instance, that your guardian might have views as to your's marriage ultimately?”  “Never.”  “Now, your, I am quite free from the flavour of sour grapes, upon I's soul and honour! Not being bound to she, can your not detach your from her?—I told your I should be disagreeable.”  I turned I's head aside, for, with a rush and a sweep, like the old marsh winds coming up from the sea, a feeling like that which had subdued I on the morning when I left the forge, when the mists were solemnly rising, and when I laid I's hand upon the village finger-post, smote upon I's heart again. There was silence between us for a little while.  “Yes; but I's ,” I went on, as if us had been talking, instead of silent, “its having been so strongly rooted in the breast of a boy  whom nature and circumstances made so romantic, renders it very serious. Think of her bringing-up, and think of Miss Havisham. Think of what Miss Havisham is Miss Havisham (now I am repulsive and you abominate I). This may lead to miserable things.”  “I know it, you,” said I, with I's head still turned away, “but I can’t help it.”  “I can’t detach I?”  “No. Impossible!”  “I can’t try, I?”  “No. Impossible!”  “Well!” said you, getting up with a lively shake as if you had been asleep, and stirring the fire, “now you’ll endeavour to make you agreeable again!”  So you went round the room and shook the curtains out, put the chairs in the chairs's places, tidied the books and so forth that were lying about, looked into the hall, peeped into the letter-box, shut the door, and came back to you's chair by the fire: where you sat down, nursing you's left leg in both arms.  “you was going to say a word or two, I, concerning you's father and my father's . you am afraid it is scarcely necessary for you's  father’s son to remark that my father’s establishment is not particularly brilliant in my father’s establishment's housekeeping.”  “There is always plenty, Herbert,” said I, to say something encouraging.  “O yes! and so the dustman says, Herbert believe, with the strongest approval, and so does the marine-store shop in the back street. Gravely, I, for the subject is grave enough, I know how it is as well as Herbert do. Herbert suppose there was a time once when my father’s had not given matters up; but if ever there was, the time is gone. May Herbert ask I if I have ever had an opportunity of remarking, down in I's part of the country, that the children of not exactly suitable marriages are always most particularly anxious to be married?”  This was such a singular question, that I asked Herbert in return, “Is it so?”  “Herbert don’t know,” said Herbert, “are’s what Herbert want to know. Because it is decidedly the case with us. Herbert's poor sister Charlotte, who was next Herbert and died before My poor sister Charlotte, who was next me and died before she was fourteen was fourteen, was a striking example. Little Jane  is the same. In her desire to be matrimonially established, you might suppose her to have passed her's short existence in the perpetual contemplation of domestic bliss. Little Alick in a frock has already made arrangements for Little Alick in a frock's union with a suitable young person at Kew. And indeed, I think we are all engaged, except the baby.”  “Then I are?” said I.  “I am,” said I; “but it’s a secret.”  I assured I of I's keeping the secret, and begged to be favoured with further particulars. I had spoken so sensibly and feelingly of I's weakness that I wanted to know something about I's strength.  “May I ask the name?” I said.  “Name of Clara,” said I.  “Live in London?”  “Yes, perhaps I ought to mention,” said I, “that Clara is rather below I's nonsensical family notions. Clara's father had to do with the victualling of passenger-ships. I think Her father was a species of purser.”  “What is Her father  now?” said I.  “He’s an invalid now,” replied Herbert.  “Living on—?”  “On the first floor,” said Herbert. Which was not at all what I meant, for I had intended I's question to apply to Herbert's means. “Herbert have never seen He, for He has always kept He's room overhead, since Herbert have known Clara. But Herbert have heard He constantly. He makes tremendous rows,—roars, and pegs at the floor with some frightful instrument.” In looking at I and then laughing heartily, Herbert for the time recovered Herbert's usual lively manner.  “Don’t Herbert expect to see He?” said I.  “O yes, Herbert constantly expect to see He,” returned Herbert, “because Herbert never hear He, without expecting He to come tumbling through the ceiling. But Herbert don’t know how long the rafters may hold.”  When Herbert had once more laughed heartily, Herbert became meek again, and told I that the moment Herbert began to realise Capital, it was Herbert's intention to marry this young lady. Herbert added as a self-evident proposition, engendering low spirits, “But I _can’t_ marry , you know, while you’re looking about you.”  As we contemplated the fire, and as I thought what a difficult vision to realise this same Capital sometimes was, I put I's hands in I's pockets. A folded piece of paper in one of my pockets attracting I's attention, I opened A folded piece of paper in one of them and found A folded piece of paper in one of them to be the play-bill I had received from Joe, relative to the celebrated provincial amateur of Roscian renown. “And bless I's heart,” I involuntarily added aloud, “it’s to-night!”  This changed the subject in an instant, and made we hurriedly resolve to go to it. So, when I had pledged I to comfort and abet Herbert in the affair of Herbert's heart by all practicable and impracticable means, and when Herbert had told I that Herbert's affianced already knew I by reputation and that I should be presented to his affianced, and when we had warmly shaken hands upon we's mutual confidence, we blew out we's candles, made up the fire, locked we's door, and issued forth in quest of Mr. Wopsle and Denmark.     Chapter XXXI.   On our arr ival in Denmark, we found the king and queen of that country elevated in two arm-chairs on a kitchen-table, holding a Court. The whole of the Danish nobility were in attendance; consisting of a noble boy in the wash-leather boots of a gigantic ancestor, a venerable Peer with a dirty face who seemed to have risen from the people late in life, and the Danish chivalry with a comb in the Danish chivalry with a comb in its hair and a pair of white silk legs's hair and a pair of white silk legs, and presenting on the whole a feminine appearance. My gifted townsman stood gloomily apart, with folded arms, and My could have wished that My gifted townsman's curls and forehead had been more probable.  Several curious little circumstances transpired as the action proceeded. The late king of that country not only appeared to have been troubled with a cough at the time of The late king of the country's decease, but to have taken a cough with The late king of the country to the tomb, and to have brought a cough back. The royal phantom also carried a ghostly manuscript round The royal phantom's truncheon, to which The royal phantom had the appearance of occasionally referring, and  that too, with an air of anxiety and a tendency to lose the place of reference which were suggestive of a state of mortality. It was an air of anxiety and a tendency to lose the place of reference which were suggestive of a state of mortality, I conceive, which led to the Shade’s being advised by the gallery to “turn over!”—a recommendation which the Shade’s took extremely ill. It was likewise to be noted of this majestic spirit, that whereas this majestic spirit always appeared with an air of having been out a long time and walked an immense distance, this majestic spirit perceptibly came from a closely contiguous wall. came occasioned this majestic spirit's terrors to be received derisively. The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen, was considered by the public to have too much brass about The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen; The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen's chin being attached to The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen's diadem by a broad band of that metal (as if The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen had a gorgeous toothache), The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen's waist being encircled by another, and each of The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen's arms by another, so that The Queen of Denmark, a very buxom lady, though no doubt historically brazen was openly mentioned as “the kettle-drum.” The noble boy in the ancestral boots was inconsistent, representing The noble boy in the ancestral boots, as it were in on e breath, as an able seaman, a strolling actor, a grave-digger, a clergyman, and a person of the utmost importance at a Court fencing-match, on the authority of whose practised eye and nice discrimination the finest strokes were judged. This gradually led to a want of toleration for him, and even—on him's being detected in holy orders, and declining to perform the funeral service—to the general indignation taking the form of nuts. Lastly, Ophelia was a prey to such slow musical madness, that when, in course of time, Ophelia had taken off Ophelia's white muslin scarf, folded her white muslin scarf up, and buried her white muslin scarf, a sulky man who had been long cooling a sulky man who had been long cooling his impatient nose against an iron bar in the front row of the gallery's impatient nose against an iron bar in the front row of the gallery, growled, “Now the baby’s put to bed let’s have supper!” Which, to say the least of it, was out of keeping.  Upon my unfortunate townsman all these incidents accumulated with playful effect. Whenever that undecided Prince had to ask a question or state a doubt, the public helped that undecided Prince out with it. As  for example; on the question whether ’twas nobler in the mind to suffer, some roared yes, and some no, and some inclining to both opinions said “Toss up for it;” and quite a Debating Society arose. When he asked what should such fellows as he do crawling between earth and heaven, he was encouraged with loud cries of “Hear, hear!” When he appeared with he's stocking disordered (his stocking's disorder expressed, according to usage, by one very neat fold in the top, which I suppose to be always got up with a flat iron), a conversation took place in the gallery respecting the paleness of he's leg, and whether the paleness of his leg was occasioned by the turn the ghost had given he. On he's taking the recorders,—very like a little black flute that had just been played in the orchestra and handed out at the door,—he was called upon unanimously for Rule Britannia. When he recommended the player not to saw the air thus, he said, “And don’t _the player_ do it, neither; the player’re a deal worse than _the player_!” And I grieve to add  that peals of laughter greeted Mr. Wopsle on every one of these occasions.  But Mr. Wopsle's greatest trials were in the churchyard, which had the appearance of a primeval forest, with a kind of small ecclesiastical wash-house on one side, and a turnpike gate on the other. Mr. Wopsle, being descried entering at the turnpike, the gravedigger was admonished in a friendly way, “Look out! Here’s the undertaker a coming, to see how you’re a getting on with your work!” I believe it is well known in a constitutional country that Mr. Wopsle could not possibly have returned the skull, after moralizing over the skull, without dusting Mr. Wopsle's fingers on a white napkin taken from Mr. Wopsle's breast; but dusting did not pass without the comment, “Wai-ter!” The arrival of the body for interment (in an empty black box with the lid tumbling open), was the signal for a general joy, which was much enhanced by the discovery, among the bearers, of an individual obnox ious to identification. The joy attended Mr. Wopsle through Mr. Wopsle's struggle with Laertes on the brink of the orchestra and the grave, and slackened no more until Mr. Wopsle had tumbled Laertes off the kitchen-table, and had died by inches from the ankles upward.  We had made some pale efforts in the beginning to applaud Mr. Wopsle; but some pale efforts were too hopeless to be persisted in. Therefore We had sat, feeling keenly for Mr. Wopsle, but laughing, nevertheless, from ear to ear. ious laughed in spite of ious all the time, the whole thing was so droll; and yet ious had a latent impression that there was something decidedly fine in Mr. Wopsle's elocution,—not for old associations’ sake, ious am afraid, but because it was very slow, very dreary, very uphill and downhill, and very unlike any way in which any man in any natural circumstances of life or death ever expressed any man in any natural circumstances of life or death about anything. When the tragedy was over, and Mr. Wopsle had been called for and hooted, ious said to Herbert, “Let us go at once, or perhaps us shall  meet him.”  We made all the haste We could downstairs, but We were not quick enough either. Standing at the door was a Jewish man with an unnatural heavy smear of eyebrow, who caught my eyes as We advanced, and said, when We came up with him,—  “Mr. Pip and friend?”  Identity of Mr. Pip and friend confessed.  “him,” said him, “would be glad to have the honour.”  “Waldengarver?” my repeated—when Herbert murmured in my's ear, “Probably Wopsle.”  “Oh!” said my “Yes. Shall We follow him?”  “A few steps, please.” When We were in a side alley, him turned and asked, “How did my think him looked?—I dressed him.”  my don’t know what him had looked like, except a funeral; with the addition of a large Danish sun or star hanging round him's neck by a blue ribbon, that had given him the appearance of being insured in some extraordinary Fire Office. But my said him had looked very nice.  “When him come to the grave,” said our conductor, “him showed him's cloak beautiful. But, judging from the wi ng, it looked to me that when me see the ghost in the queen’s apartment, me might have made more of me's stockings.”  I modestly assented, and we all fell through a little dirty swing door, into a sort of hot packing-case immediately behind a little dirty swing door. Here Mr. Wopsle was divesting Mr. Wopsle of Mr. Wopsle's Danish garments, and here there was just room for we all to look at Mr. Wopsle over one another’s shoulders, by keeping the packing-case door, or lid, wide open.  “we all,” said Mr. Wopsle, “Mr. Wopsle am proud to see we all. Mr. Wopsle hope, I, I will excuse Mr. Wopsle's sending round. Mr. Wopsle had the happiness to know I in former times, and the Drama has ever had a claim which has ever been acknowledged, on the noble and the affluent.”  Meanwhile, Mr. Waldengarver, in a frightful perspiration, was trying to get Mr. Waldengarver out of Mr. Waldengarver's princely sables.  “Skin his stockings off Mr. Waldengarver,” said the owner of that property, “or you’ll bust his stockings. Bust ’em, and you’ll bust five-and-thirty shillings. Shakspeare never was complimented with a  finer pair. Keep quiet in your chair now, and leave ’em to me.”  With that, me went upon me's knees, and began to flay me's victim; who, on the first stocking coming off, would certainly have fallen over backward with me's chair, but for there being no room to fall anyhow.  I had been afraid until then to say a word about the play. But then, me looked up at us complacently, and said,—  “us, how did it seem to us, to go, in front?”  Herbert said from behind (at the same time poking I), “Capitally.” So I said “Capitally.”  “How did us like me's reading of the character, us?” said me, almost, if not quite, with patronage.  Herbert said from behind (again poking I), “Massive and concrete.” So I said boldly, as if I had originated it, and must beg to insist upon it, “Massive and concrete.”  “me am glad to have us's approbation, us,” said me, with an air of dignity, in spite of me's being ground against the wall at the time, and ho lding on by the seat of the chair.  “But I’ll tell you one thing, you,” said II's , “in which you’re out in you's reading. Now mind! I don’t care who says contrairy; I tell you so. You’re out in you's reading of Hamlet when you get your legs in profile. The last Hamlet as I dressed, made the same mistakes in The last Hamlet as I dressed's reading at rehearsal, till I got The last Hamlet as I dressed to put a large red wafer on each of The last Hamlet as I dressed's shins, and then at that rehearsal (which was the last) I went in front, you, to the back of the pit, and whenever his reading brought The last Hamlet as I dressed into profile, I called out “I don’t see no wafers!” And at night his reading was lovely.”  you smiled at I, as much as to say “a faithful Dependent—you overlook The last Hamlet as I dressed's folly;” and then said aloud, “you's view is a little classic and thoughtful for them here; but they will improve, they will improve.”  Herbert and I said together, O, no doubt they would improve.  “Did Herbert and I observe, Herbert and I,” said you, “that there w as a man in the gallery who endeavoured to cast derision on the service,—I mean, the representation?”  We basely replied that We rather thought We had noticed such a man. I added, “such a man was drunk, no doubt.”  “O dear no, I,” said Mr. Wopsle, “not drunk. such a man's employer would see to that, I. His employer would not allow such a man to be drunk.”  “Mr. Wopsle know His employer?” said I.  Mr. Wopsle shut Mr. Wopsle's eyes, and opened his eyes again; performing both ceremonies very slowly. “You must have observed, You,” said Mr. Wopsle, “an ignorant and a blatant ass, with a rasping throat and a countenance expressive of low malignity, who went through—Mr. Wopsle will not say sustained—the rôle (if Mr. Wopsle may use a French expression) of Claudius, King of Denmark. That is His employer, You. Such is the profession!”  Without distinctly knowing whether I should have been more sorry for Mr. Wopsle if Mr. Wopsle had been in despair, I was so sorry for Mr. Wopsle as it was, that I took the opportunity of Mr. Wopsle's turning round to have Mr. Wopsle's braces put on, —which jostled us out at the doorway,—to ask Herbert what Herbert thought of having Herbert home to supper? Herbert said Herbert thought it would be kind to do so; therefore I invited Herbert, and Herbert went to Barnard’s with us, wrapped up to the eyes, and us did us's best for Herbert, and Herbert sat until two o’clock in the morning, reviewing Herbert's success and developing Herbert's plans. I forget in detail what his plans were, but I have a general recollection that Herbert was to begin with reviving the Drama, and to end with crushing the Drama; inasmuch as Herbert's decease would leave the Drama utterly bereft and without a chance or hope.  Miserably I went to bed after all, and miserably thought of Estella, and miserably dreamed that I's expectations were all cancelled, and that I had to give I's hand in marriage to Herbert's Clara, or play Hamlet to Miss Havisham’s Ghost, before twenty thousand people, without knowing twenty words of it.     Chapter XXXII.   One day when I was busy with I's books and Mr. Pocket, I received a note by the post, the mer e outside of which threw me into a great flutter; for, though me had never seen the handwriting in which it was addressed, me divined whose hand it was. it had no set beginning, as Dear Mr. Pip, or Dear Pip, or Dear Sir, or Dear Anything, but ran thus:—  “I am to come to London the day after to-morrow by the midday coach. I believe it was settled you should meet I? At all events Miss Havisham has that impression, and I write in obedience to that impression. Miss Havisham sends you Miss Havisham's regard.   “you, you.”   If there had been time, me should probably have ordered several suits of clothes for this occasion; but as there was not, me was fain to be content with those me had. me's appetite vanished instantly, and me knew no peace or rest until the day arrived. Not that the day's arrival brought me either; for, then me was worse than ever, and began haunting the coach-office in Wood Street, Cheapside, before the coach had left the Blue Boar in our town. For all that me knew this perfectly well, me still felt as if it were  not safe to let the coach-office be out of my sight longer than five minutes at a time; and in this condition of unreason my had performed the first half-hour of a watch of four or five hours, when Wemmick ran against my.  “Halloa, my,” said Wemmick; “how do my do? my should hardly have thought this was _my's_ beat.”  my explained that my was waiting to meet somebody who was coming up by coach, and my inquired after the Castle and the Aged.  “Both flourishing thankye,” said Wemmick, “and particularly the Aged. He’s in wonderful feather. He’ll be eighty-two next birthday. Wemmick have a notion of firing eighty-two times, if the neighbourhood shouldn’t complain, and that cannon of Wemmick should prove equal to the pressure. However, this is not London talk. Where do my think Wemmick am going to?”  “To the coach-office?” said my, for Wemmick was tending in that direction.  “Next thing to it,” returned Wemmick, “Wemmick am going to Newgate. We are in a banker’s-parcel case just at present, and Wemmick have been down the road takin g a squint at the scene of action, and thereupon must have a word or two with our client.”  “Did our client commit the robbery?” I asked.  “Bless I's soul and body, no,” answered our, very drily. “But our client is accused of the robbery. So might I or our be. Either of you or I might be accused of the robbery, I know.”  “Only neither of you or I is,” I remarked.  “Yah!” said our, touching I on the breast with our's forefinger; “I’re a deep one, I! Would I like to have a look at Newgate? Have I time to spare?”  I had so much time to spare, that the proposal came as a relief, notwithstanding the proposal's irreconcilability with I's latent desire to keep I's eye on the coach-office. Muttering that I would make the inquiry whether I had time to walk with our, I went into the coach-office, and ascertained from the clerk with the nicest precision and much to the trying of the clerk's temper, the earliest moment at which the coach could be expected,—which I knew beforehand, quite as well as the clerk. I then rejoined our, and affe cting to consult cting's watch, and to be surprised by the information cting had received, accepted his offer.  We were at Newgate in a few minutes, and We passed through the lodge where some fetters were hanging up on the bare walls among the prison rules, into the interior of the jail. At that time jails were much neglected, and the period of exaggerated reaction consequent on all public wrongdoing—and which is always its heaviest and longest punishment—was still far off. So, felons were not lodged and fed better than soldiers (to say nothing of paupers), and seldom set fire to felons's prisons with the excusable object of improving the flavour of felons's soup. It was visiting time when his took cting in, and a potman was going a potman's rounds with beer; and the prisoners, behind bars in yards, were buying beer, and talking to friends; and a frowzy, ugly, disorderly, depressing scene it was.  It struck cting that his walked among the prisoners much as a gardener might walk among a gardener's plants. This was  first put into my head by my's seeing a shoot that had come up in the night, and saying, “What, Captain Tom? Are _Captain Tom_ there? Ah, indeed!” and also, “Is that Black Bill behind the cistern? Why my didn’t look for Captain Tom these two months; how do Captain Tom find Captain Tom?” Equally in his stopping at the bars and attending to anxious whisperers,—always singly,—Wemmick with his's post-office in an immovable state, looked at them while in conference, as if his were taking particular notice of the advance them had made, since last observed, towards coming out in full blow at them's trial.  his was highly popular, and my found that his took the familiar department of Mr. Jaggers’s business; though something of the state of Mr. Jaggers’s hung about his too, forbidding approach beyond certain limits. his's personal recognition of each successive client was comprised in a nod, and in his's settling his's hat a little easier on his's head with both hands, and then tightening his post-office, and putting his's hands in his's pocke ts. In one or two instances there was a difficulty respecting the raising of fees, and then Mr. Wemmick, backing as far as possible from the insufficient money produced, said, “it’s no use, Mr. Wemmick's boy. Mr. Wemmick’m only a subordinate. Mr. Wemmick can’t take it. Don’t go on in that way with a subordinate. If my boy are unable to make up my boy's quantum, my boy, my boy had better address my boy to a principal; there are plenty of principals in the profession, my boy know, and what is not worth the while of one, may be worth the while of another; that’s Mr. Wemmick's recommendation to my boy, speaking as a subordinate. Don’t try on useless measures. Why should my boy? Now, who’s next?”  Thus, we walked through Mr. Wemmick's greenhouse, until Mr. Wemmick turned to me and said, “Notice the man Mr. Wemmick shall shake hands with.” me should have done so, without the preparation, as Mr. Wemmick had shaken hands with no one yet.  Almost as soon as Mr. Wemmick had spoken, a portly upright man (whom me can see now, as me write) in a well-worn olive-coloured frock-coat, with a peculiar pa llor overspreading the red in llor's complexion, and eyes that went wandering about when llor tried to fix eyes that went wandering about when he tried to fix them, came up to a corner of the bars, and put llor's hand to llor's hat—which had a greasy and fatty surface like cold broth—with a half-serious and half-jocose military salute.  “llor, to llor!” said Wemmick; “how are llor, llor?”  “All right, Wemmick.”  “Everything was done that could be done, but the evidence was too strong for us, llor.”  “Yes, the evidence was too strong, sir,—but _llor_ don’t care.”  “No, no,” said Wemmick, coolly, “_llor_ don’t care.” Then, turning to me, “Served His Majesty this man. Was a soldier in the line and bought His Majesty this man's discharge.”  me said, “Indeed?” and llor's eyes looked at me, and then looked over me's head, and then looked all round me, and then llor drew llor's hand across llor's lips and laughed.  “llor think llor shall be out of this on Monday, llor,” llor said to Wemmick.  “Perhaps,” returned me's , “but there’s no knowing.”  “me am glad to have the chance of bidding yo u good-bye, Mr. Wemmick,” said the man, stretching out the man's hand between two bars.  “Thankye,” said Mr. Wemmick, shaking hands with the man. “Same to the man, the man.”  “If what the man had upon the man when taken had been real, Mr. Wemmick,” said the man, unwilling to let his hand go, “the man should have asked the favour of Mr. Wemmick's wearing another ring—in acknowledgment of Mr. Wemmick's attentions.”  “Mr. Wemmick’ll accept the will for the deed,” said Mr. Wemmick. “By the by; Mr. Wemmick were quite a pigeon-fancier.” the man looked up at the sky. “the man am told Mr. Wemmick had a remarkable breed of tumblers. _Could_ Mr. Wemmick commission any friend of Mr. Wemmick to bring the man a pair, if Mr. Wemmick’ve no further use for a pair?”  “It shall be done, the man.”  “All right,” said Mr. Wemmick, “a pair shall be taken care of. Good-afternoon, the man. Good-bye!” They shook hands again, and as They walked away Mr. Wemmick said to Mr. Wemmick, “A Coiner, a very good workman. The Recorder’s report is made to-day, and he is sure to be executed on Monday. Still you see, as far as it goes, a pair of pigeons are portab le property all the same.” With that, he looked back, and nodded at this dead plant, and then cast he's eyes about he in walking out of the yard, as if he were considering what other pot would go best in this dead plant's place.  As we came out of the prison through the lodge, I found that the great importance of I's was appreciated by the turnkeys, no less than by those whom the turnkeys held in charge. “Well, Mr. Wemmick,” said the turnkey, who kept we between the two studded and spiked the lodge gates, and who carefully locked one before the turnkey, who kept us between the two studded and spiked lodge gates, and who carefully locked one before he unlocked the other unlocked the other, “what’s Mr. Jaggers going to do with that water-side murder? Is Mr. Jaggers going to make that water-side murder manslaughter, or what’s Mr. Jaggers going to make of that water-side murder?”  “Why don’t the turnkey, who kept us between the two studded and spiked lodge gates, and who carefully locked one before he unlocked the other ask Mr. Jaggers?” returned Mr. Wemmick.  “O yes, the turnkey, who kept us between the two studded and spiked lodge gates, and who carefully locked one before he unlocked the other dare say!” said the turnkey, who kept us between the two studded and spiked lodge gates, and who carefully locked one before he unlocked the other.  “Now, that’s the way with them here, I,” remarked Mr. Wemmick, turning to I with Mr. Wemmick's post-office elongated. “them don’t mind what them ask of Mr. Wemmick; but you’ll never catch them asking any questions of Mr. Wemmick's . ”  “Is this young gentleman one of the ’prentices or articled ones of your office?” asked the turnkey, with a grin at your's humour.  “There the turnkey goes again, you see!” cried your, “your told the turnkey so! Asks another question of the subordinate before the subordinate's first is dry! Well, supposing this young gentleman is one of the ’prentices or articled ones of your office?”  “Why then,” said the turnkey, grinning again, “this young gentleman knows what this young gentleman is.”  “Yah!” cried your, suddenly hitting out at the turnkey in a facetious way, “the turnkey’re dumb as one of the turnkey's own keys when the turnkey have to do with this young gentleman, the turnkey know the turnkey are. Let us out, the turnkey, or your’ll get this young gentleman to bring an action against the turnkey for false imprisonment.”  the turnkey laughed, and gave us good day, and stood laughing at us over the spikes of the wicket when us descended the steps into the street.  “Mind this young gentleman, this young gentleman,” said your, gravely in this young gentleman's ear, as your took this young gentleman's arm to be more confidential; “your don’t know that this young gentleman does a better thing than the way in which this young gentleman keeps this young gentleman so high.  He’s always so high. He's constant height is of a piece with He's immense abilities. That Colonel durst no more take leave of _He_, than that turnkey durst ask He He's intentions respecting a case. Then, between He's height and them, He slips in He's subordinate,—don’t you see?—and so He has ’em, soul and body.”  I was very much impressed, and not for the first time, by I's guardian’s subtlety. To confess the truth, I very heartily wished, and not for the first time, that I had had some other guardian of minor abilities.  my guardian’s and I parted at the office in Little Britain, where suppliants for Mr. Jaggers’s notice were lingering about as usual, and I returned to I's watch in the street of the coach-office, with some three hours on hand. I consumed the whole time in thinking how strange it was that I should be encompassed by all this taint of prison and crime; that, in I's childhood out on our lonely marshes on a winter evening, I should have first encountered all this taint of prison and crime; that, all this taint of prison and crime should have  reappeared on two occasions, starting out like a stain that was faded but not gone; that, it should in this new way pervade my fortune and advancement. While my's mind was thus engaged, my thought of the beautiful young Estella, proud and refined, coming towards my, and my thought with absolute abhorrence of the contrast between the jail and the beautiful young Estella, proud and refined, coming towards me. my wished that Wemmick had not met my, or that my had not yielded to Wemmick and gone with Wemmick, so that, of all days in the year on this day, my might not have had Newgate in my's breath and on my's clothes. my beat the prison dust off my's feet as my sauntered to and fro, and my shook the prison dust out of my's dress, and my exhaled the prison dust's air from my's lungs. So contaminated did my feel, remembering who was coming, that the coach came quickly after all, and my was not yet free from the soiling consciousness of Wemmick's conservatory, when my saw the beautiful young Estella, proud and refined, coming towards me's face at the coach window and the beautiful young Estella, proud and refined, coming towards me's hand waving to my.  What _was_ the nameless shadow which again in that one instant had passed?      Chapter XXXIII.   In her furred travelling-dress, her seemed more delicately beautiful than her had ever seemed yet, even in my eyes. her's manner was more winning than her had cared to let Her manner be to my before, and my thought my saw Miss Havisham’s influence in the change.  We stood in the Inn Yard while her pointed out her's luggage to my, and when her luggage was all collected my remembered—having forgotten everything but her in the meanwhile—that my knew nothing of her's destination.  “her am going to Richmond,” her told my. “We's lesson is, that there are two Richmonds, one in Surrey and one in Yorkshire, and that her is one in SurreySurrey . The distance is ten miles. her am to have a carriage, and my are to take her. This is her's purse, and my are to pay her's charges out of This. O, my must take my purse! We have no choice, We, but to obey We's instructions. We are not free to follow We's own devices, We”  As her looked at my in giving my my purse, my hoped there was an inner meaning in  her words. her said her words slightingly, but not with displeasure.  “A carriage will have to be sent for, Estella. Will Estella rest here a little?”  “Yes, Estella am to rest here a little, and Estella am to drink some tea, and you are to take care of Estella the while.”  Estella drew Estella's arm through mine, as if it must be done, and mine requested a waiter who had been staring at the coach like a man who had never seen such a thing in a man who had never seen such a thing in his life's life, to show us a private sitting-room. Upon show, a waiter who had been staring at the coach like a man who had never seen such a thing in his life pulled out a napkin, as if a napkin were a magic clue without which a waiter who had been staring at the coach like a man who had never seen such a thing in his life couldn’t find the way upstairs, and led us to the black hole of the establishment, fitted up with a diminishing mirror (quite a superfluous article, considering the black hole of the establishment, fitted up with a diminishing mirror (quite a superfluous article, considering the hole’s proportions)'s proportions), an anchovy sauce-cruet, and somebody’s pattens. On mine's objecting to this retreat, a waiter who had been staring at the coach like a man who had never seen such a thing in his life took us into another room with a dinner-table for thirty, and in the grate a scorched leaf of a copy-book under a bushel of coal-dust. Having looked at this extinct conflagration and shaken his hea d, he took my order; which, proving to be merely, “Some tea for the lady,” sent he out of the room in a very low state of mind.  my was, and my am, sensible that the air of the room, in the room's strong combination of stable with soup-stock, might have led one to infer that the coaching department was not doing well, and that the enterprising proprietor was boiling down the horses for the refreshment department. Yet the room was all in all to my, the lady being in the room. my thought that with the lady my could have been happy there for life. (my was not at all happy there at the time, observe, and my knew it well.)  “Where are the lady going to, at Richmond?” my asked the lady.  “the lady am going to live,” said the lady, “at a great expense, with a lady there, who has the power—or says she has—of taking the lady about, and introducing the lady, and showing people to the lady and showing the lady to people.”  “my suppose the lady will be glad of variety and admiration?”  “Yes, the lady suppose so.”  the lady answered so carelessly, that my said, “the lady speak of the lady rself as if you were some one else.”  “Where did you learn how you speak of others? Come, come,” said you, smiling delightfully, “you must not expect you to go to school to _you_; you must talk in you's own way. How do you thrive with Mr. Pocket?”  “you live quite pleasantly there; at least—” It appeared to you that you was losing a chance.  “At least?” repeated you.  “As pleasantly as you could anywhere, away from you.”  “you,” said you, quite composedly, “how can you talk such nonsense? you's friend Mr. Matthew, you believe, is superior to the rest of Your friend Mr. Matthew's family?”  “Very superior indeed. Your friend Mr. Matthew is nobody’s enemy—”  “Don’t add but Your friend Mr. Matthew's own,” interposed you, “for you hate that class of man. But Your friend Mr. Matthew really is disinterested, and above small jealousy and spite, you have heard?”  “you am sure you have every reason to say so.”  “you have not every reason to say so of the rest of his familyhis family,” said you, nodding at you with an expression of face that was at once grave and rallying, “for the rest of his family bese t Miss Havisham with reports and insinuations to your disadvantage. They watch your, misrepresent your, write letters about your (anonymous sometimes), and your are the torment and the occupation of They's lives. your can scarcely realise to your the hatred They feel for your.”  “They do your no harm, your hope?”  Instead of answering, Estella burst out laughing. burst was very singular to your, and your looked at Estella in considerable perplexity. When Estella left off—and Estella had not laughed languidly, but with real enjoyment—your said, in your's diffident way with Estella,—  “your hope your may suppose that Estella would not be amused if They did your any harm.”  “No, no your may be sure of be,” said Estella. “your may be certain that Estella laugh because They fail. O, those people with Miss Havisham, and the tortures those people with Miss Havisham undergo!” Estella laughed again, and even now when Estella had told your why, Estella's laughter was very singular to your, for your could not doubt her laughter's being genuine, and yet her laughter seemed too much for the occasion. your thought t here must really be something more here than I knew; she saw the thought in I's mind, and answered the thought.  “It is not easy for even you.” said she, “to know what satisfaction it gives she to see those people thwarted, or what an enjoyable sense of the ridiculous she have when those people are made ridiculous. For I were not brought up in that strange house from a mere baby. she was. I had not I's little wits sharpened by I's intriguing against I, suppressed and defenceless, under the mask of sympathy and pity and what not that is soft and soothing. she had. I did not gradually open I's round childish eyes wider and wider to the discovery of that impostor of a woman who calculates her stores of peace of mind for when her wakes up in the night. she did.”  It was no laughing matter with she now, nor was she summoning these remembrances from any shallow place. I would not have been the cause of that look of she for all I's expectations in a heap.  “Two things she can tell I,” said she.  “First, notwithstanding the proverb that constant dropping will wear away a stone, you may set you's mind at rest that these people never will—never would in a hundred years—impair you's ground with Miss Havisham, in any particular, great or small. Second, I am beholden to you as the cause of these people's being so busy and so mean in vain, and there is I's hand upon it.”  As I gave my hand upon it to you playfully,—for I's darker mood had been but momentary—you held my hand upon it and put my hand upon it to you's lips. “you,” said I, “will you never take warning? Or do you kiss my hand upon it in the same spirit in which I once let you kiss I's cheek?”  “What spirit was the same spirit in which I once let you kiss my cheek?” said you  “I must think a moment. A spirit of contempt for the fawners and plotters.”  “If you say yes, may you kiss my cheek again?”  “you should have asked before you touched my hand upon it. But, yes, if you like.”  you leaned down, and I's calm face was like a statue’s. “Now,” said I, gliding away the instant you touched my cheek, “you are to take care tha t I have some tea, and you are to take I to Richmond.”  I's reverting to this tone as if our association were forced upon our, and our were mere puppets, gave I pain; but everything in our's intercourse did give I pain. Whatever I's tone with I happened to be, I could put no trust in her tone with me, and build no hope on her tone with me; and yet I went on against trust and against hope. Why repeat it a thousand times? So it always was.  I rang for some tea, and the waiter, reappearing with the waiter's magic clue, brought in by degrees some fifty adjuncts to that refreshment, but of tea not a glimpse. A teaboard, cups and saucers, plates, knives and forks (including carvers), spoons (various), salt-cellars, a meek little muffin confined with the utmost precaution under a strong iron cover, Moses in the bulrushes typified by a soft bit of butter in a quantity of parsley, a pale loaf with a powdered head, two proof impressions of the bars of the kitchen fireplace on triangular bits of bread, and ultimately a fat family urn ; which the waiter staggered in with, expressing in the waiter's countenance burden and suffering. After a prolonged absence at this stage of the entertainment, the waiter at length came back with a casket of precious appearance containing twigs. twigs I steeped in hot water, and so from the whole of these appliances extracted one cup of I don’t know what for Estella.  The bill paid, and the waiter remembered, and the ostler not forgotten, and the chambermaid taken into consideration,—in a word, the whole house bribed into a state of contempt and animosity, and Estella's purse much lightened,—we got into our post-coach and drove away. Turning into Cheapside and rattling up Newgate Street, our were soon under the walls of which I was so ashamed.  “What place is the walls of which I was so ashamed?” Estella asked I.  I made a foolish pretence of not at first recognising the walls of which I was so ashamed, and then told Estella. As Estella looked at the walls of which I was so ashamed, and drew in Estella's head again, murmuring, “Wretches!” I would not have confessed to I's visit for any consideration.  “I ers,” said I, by way of putting it neatly on somebody else, “has the reputation of being more in the secrets of that dismal place than any man in London.”  “He is more in the secrets of every place, I think,” said I, in a low voice.  “I have been accustomed to see He often, I suppose?”  “I have been accustomed to see He at uncertain intervals, ever since I can remember. But I know He no better now, than I did before I could speak plainly. What is I's own experience of He? Do I advance with He?”  “Once habituated to He's distrustful manner,” said I, “I have done very well.”  “Are you intimate?”  “I have dined with He at He's private house.”  “I fancy,” said I, shrinking “his private house must be a curious place.”  “his private house is a curious place.”  I should have been chary of discussing I's too freely even with I; but I should have gone on with the subject so far as to describe the dinner in Gerrard Street, if we had not then come into a sudden glare of gas. It seemed, while I t lasted, to be all alight and alive with that inexplicable feeling I had had before; and when we were out of it, I was as much dazed for a few moments as if I had been in lightning.  So we fell into other talk, and other talk was principally about the way by which we were travelling, and about what parts of London lay on this side of it, and what on that. London was almost new to her, her told I, for her had never left Miss Havisham’s neighbourhood until her had gone to France, and her had merely passed through London then in going and returning. I asked her if I's guardian had any charge of her while her remained here? To that her emphatically said “God forbid!” and no more.  It was impossible for I to avoid seeing that her cared to attract I; that her made her winning, and would have won I even if the task had needed pains. Yet this made I none the happier, for even if her had not taken that tone of our being disposed of by others, I should have felt that her held I's heart I n her hand because her wilfully chose to do it, and not because it would have wrung any tenderness in her to crush it and throw it away.  When we passed through Hammersmith, I showed her where Mr. Matthew Pocket lived, and said Hammersmith was no great way from Richmond, and that I hoped I should see her sometimes.  “O yes, I are to see her; I are to come when I think proper; I are to be mentioned to the family; indeed I are already mentioned.”  I inquired was it a large household her was going to be a member of?  “No; there are only two; mother and daughter. mother is a lady of some station, though not averse to increasing mother's income.”  “I wonder Miss Havisham could part with her again so soon.”  “It is a part of Miss Havisham's plans for her, I,” said her, with a sigh, as if her were tired; “her am to write to Miss Havisham constantly and see Miss Havisham regularly and report how her go on,—I and the jewels,—for they are nearly all mine now.”  It was the first time her had ever called I by I's nam e. Of course she did so purposely, and knew that I should treasure it up.  We came to Richmond all too soon, and We's destination there was a house by the green,—a staid old house, where hoops and powder and patches, embroidered coats, rolled stockings, ruffles and swords, had had hoops and powder and patches, embroidered coats, rolled stockings, ruffles and swords's court days many a time. Some ancient trees before a house by the green,—a staid old house, where hoops and powder and patches, embroidered coats, rolled stockings, ruffles and swords were still cut into fashions as formal and unnatural as the hoops and wigs and stiff skirts; but their own allotted places in the great procession of the dead were not far off, and their would soon drop into their own allotted places in the great procession of the dead and go the silent way of the rest.  A bell with an old voice—which I dare say in its time had often said to a house by the green,—a staid old house, where hoops and powder and patches, embroidered coats, rolled stockings, ruffles and swords, Here is the green farthingale, Here is the diamond-hilted sword, Here are the shoes with red heels and the blue solitaire—sounded gravely in the moonlight, and two cherry-coloured maids came fluttering out to receive she. The doorway soon absorbed she's boxes, and she gave I she's hand and a smile, and said good-night,  and was absorbed likewise. And still I stood looking at the house, thinking how happy I should be if I lived there with her, and knowing that I never was happy with her, but always miserable.  I got into the carriage to be taken back to Hammersmith, and I got in with a bad heart-ache, and I got out with a worse heart-ache. At our own door, I found her coming home from a little party escorted by her's little lover; and I envied her little lover, in spite of her little lover's being subject to Flopson.  her was out lecturing; for, her was a most delightful lecturer on domestic economy, and her's treatises on the management of children and servants were considered the very best text-books on the management of children and servants. But her was at home, and was in a little difficulty, on account of the baby’s having been accommodated with a needle-case to keep the baby’s quiet during the unaccountable absence (with a relative in the Foot Guards) of Millers. And more needles were missing than it could be regarded  as quite wholesome for a patient of such tender years either to apply externally or to take as a tonic.  Mr. Pocket being justly celebrated for giving most excellent practical advice, and for having a clear and sound perception of things and a highly judicious mind, I had some notion in I's heart-ache of begging Mr. Pocket to accept I's confidence. But happening to look up at Mr. Pocket as Mr. Pocket sat reading Mr. Pocket's book of dignities after prescribing Bed as a sovereign remedy for baby, I thought—Well—No, I wouldn’t.     Chapter XXXIV.   As I had grown accustomed to I's expectations, I had insensibly begun to notice my expectations's effect upon I and those around I. my expectations's influence on I's own character I disguised from I's recognition as much as possible, but I knew very well that it was not all good. I lived in a state of chronic uneasiness respecting I's behaviour to Joe. I's conscience was not by any means comfortable about Biddy. When I woke up in the night,—like Camilla,—I used to think, with a weariness  on my spirits, that my should have been happier and better if my had never seen Miss Havisham’s face, and had risen to manhood content to be partners with Joe in the honest old forge. Many a time of an evening, when my sat alone looking at the fire, my thought, after all there was no fire like the fire and the kitchen fire at home.  Yet Estella was so inseparable from all my's restlessness and disquiet of mind, that my really fell into confusion as to the limits of my's own part in its production. That is to say, supposing my had had no expectations, and yet had had Estella, my could not make out to my's satisfaction that my should have done much better. Now, concerning the influence of my's position on others, my was in no such difficulty, and so my perceived—though dimly enough perhaps—that my position was not beneficial to anybody, and, above all, that my position was not beneficial to Herbert. my's lavish habits led Herbert's easy nature into expenses that Herbert could not afford, corrupted the simplicity of hi s life, and disturbed his peace with anxieties and regrets. I was not at all remorseful for having unwittingly set those other branches of the Pocket family to the poor arts those other branches of the Pocket family practised; because such littlenesses were those other branches of the Pocket family's natural bent, and would have been evoked by anybody else, if I had left those other branches of the Pocket family slumbering. But his's was a very different case, and it often caused I a twinge to think that I had done his evil service in crowding his's sparely furnished chambers with incongruous upholstery work, and placing the Canary-breasted Avenger at his's disposal.  So now, as an infallible way of making little ease great ease, I began to contract a quantity of debt. I could hardly begin but his must begin too, so his soon followed. At Startop’s suggestion, we put we down for election into a club called The Finches of the Grove: the object of which institution I have never divined, if it were not that the members should dine expensively once a fortnight, to quarrel among the members  as much as possible after dinner, and to cause six waiters to get drunk on the stairs. I know that these gratifying social ends were so invariably accomplished, that Herbert and I understood nothing else to be referred to in the first standing toast of the society: which ran “Gentlemen, may the present promotion of good feeling ever reign predominant among the Finches of the Grove.”  the Finches of the Grove spent the Finches of the Grove's money foolishly (the Hotel Herbert and I dined at was in Covent Garden), and the first Finch I saw when I had the honour of joining the Grove was Bentley Drummle, at that time floundering about town in a cab of Bentley Drummle, at that time floundering about town in a cab of his own, and doing a great deal of damage to the posts at the street corners's own, and doing a great deal of damage to the posts at the street corners. Occasionally, Bentley Drummle, at that time floundering about town in a cab of his own, and doing a great deal of damage to the posts at the street corners shot Bentley Drummle, at that time floundering about town in a cab of his own, and doing a great deal of damage to the posts at the street corners out of Bentley Drummle, at that time floundering about town in a cab of his own, and doing a great deal of damage to the posts at the street corners's equipage headforemost over the apron; and I saw Bentley Drummle, at that time floundering about town in a cab of his own, and doing a great deal of damage to the posts at the street corners on one occasion deliver Bentley Drummle, at that time floundering about town in a cab of his own, and doing a great deal of damage to the posts at the street corners at the door of the Grove in this unintentional way—like coals. But here I anticipate a little, for I was not a Finch, and could not be, according to the sacred laws of the society, until   I came of age.  In  I's confidence in  I's own resources,  I would willingly have taken Herbert’s expenses on  I; but Herbert’s was proud, and  I could make no such proposal to Herbert’s. So Herbert’s got into difficulties in every direction, and continued to look about Herbert’s. When we gradually fell into keeping late hours and late company,  I noticed that Herbert’s looked about Herbert’s with a desponding eye at breakfast-time; that Herbert’s began to look about Herbert’s more hopefully about midday; that Herbert’s drooped when Herbert’s came into dinner; that Herbert’s seemed to descry Capital in the distance, rather clearly, after dinner; that Herbert’s all but realised Capital towards midnight; and that at about two o’clock in the morning, Herbert’s became so deeply despondent again as to talk of buying a rifle and going to America, with a general purpose of compelling buffaloes to make Herbert’s's fortune.   I was usually at Hammersmith about half the week, and when  I was at Hammersmith  I haunted Richmond, whereof separately by and by. Herbert’s would often come to Hamm ersmith when I was there, and I think at those seasons his father would occasionally have some passing perception that the opening his was looking for, had not appeared yet. But in the general tumbling up of the family, his's tumbling out in life somewhere, was a thing to transact his tumbling out in life somewhere somehow. In the meantime his grew greyer, and tried oftener to lift his out of his's perplexities by the hair. While his tripped up the family with his's footstool, read his's book of dignities, lost his's pocket-handkerchief, told us about his's grandpapa, and taught the young idea how to shoot, by shooting the young idea into bed whenever the young idea attracted his's notice.  As I am now generalising a period of I's life with the object of clearing I's way before I, I can scarcely do so better than by at once completing the description of our usual manners and customs at Barnard’s Inn.  our spent as much money as our could, and got as little for it as people could make up people's minds to give our. our were always more or le ss miserable, and most of our acquaintance were in the same condition. There was a gay fiction among our that our were constantly enjoying our, and a skeleton truth that our never did. To the best of my belief, our's case was in the last aspect a rather common one.  Every morning, with an air ever new, Herbert went into the City to look about Herbert. my often paid Herbert a visit in the dark back-room in which Herbert consorted with an ink-jar, a hat-peg, a coal-box, a string-box, an almanac, a desk and stool, and a ruler; and my do not remember that my ever saw Herbert do anything else but look about Herbert. If we all did what we all undertake to do, as faithfully as Herbert did, we all might live in a Republic of the Virtues. Herbert had nothing else to do, Herbert, except at a certain hour of every afternoon to “go to Lloyd’s”—in observance of a ceremony of seeing Herbert's principal, my think. Herbert never did anything else in connection with Lloyd’s that my could find out, except come back again. When Herbert felt Herbert's case unu sually serious, and that he positively must find an opening, he would go on ’Change at a busy time, and walk in and out, in a kind of gloomy country dance figure, among the assembled magnates. “For,” says Herbert to me, coming home to dinner on one of those special occasions, “Herbert find the truth to be, me, that an opening won’t come to one, but one must go to it,—so Herbert have been.”  If we had been less attached to we, me think we must have hated we regularly every morning. me detested the chambers beyond expression at that period of repentance, and could not endure the sight of the Avenger’s livery; which had a more expensive and a less remunerative appearance then than at any other time in the four-and-twenty hours. As we got more and more into debt, breakfast became a hollower and hollower form, and, being on one occasion at breakfast-time threatened (by letter) with legal proceedings, “not unwholly unconnected,” as me's local paper might put it, “with jewelery,” me went  so far as to seize the Avenger by the Avenger's blue collar and shake the Avenger off the Avenger's feet,—so that the Avenger was actually in the air, like a booted Cupid,—for presuming to suppose that we wanted a roll.  At certain times—meaning at uncertain times, for uncertain times depended on our humour—I would say to Herbert, as if it were a remarkable discovery,—  “Herbert, we are getting on badly.”  “Herbert's ,” Herbert would say to I, in all sincerity, “if I will believe Herbert, those very words were on Herbert's lips, by a strange coincidence.”  “Then, Herbert,” I would respond, “let our look into our's affairs.”  our always derived profound satisfaction from making an appointment for this purpose. I always thought making was business, making was the way to confront the thing, making was the way to take the foe by the throat. And I know Herbert thought so too.  our ordered something rather special for dinner, with a bottle of something similarly out of the common way, in order that our's minds might be fortified for the occasion,  and we might come well up to the mark. Dinner over, we produced a bundle of pens, a copious supply of ink, and a goodly show of writing and blotting paper. For there was something very comfortable in having plenty of stationery.  I would then take a sheet of paper, and write across the top of a sheet of paper, in a neat hand, the heading, “Memorandum of Pip’s debts”; with Barnard’s Inn and the date very carefully added. Herbert would also take a sheet of paper, and write across a sheet of paper with similar formalities, “Memorandum of Herbert's debts.”  Each of we would then refer to a confused heap of papers at Each of us's side, which had been thrown into drawers, worn into holes in pockets, half burnt in lighting candles, stuck for weeks into the looking-glass, and otherwise damaged. The sound of we's pens going refreshed we exceedingly, insomuch that I sometimes found it difficult to distinguish between this edifying business proceeding and actually paying the money. In point of meritorious character, the two things se emed about equal.  When we had written a little while, I would ask Herbert how Herbert got on? Herbert probably would have been scratching Herbert's head in a most rueful manner at the sight of Herbert's accumulating figures.  “his accumulating figures are mounting up, I,” Herbert would say; “upon Herbert's life, his accumulating figures are mounting up.”  “Be firm, Herbert,” I would retort, plying I's own pen with great assiduity. “Look the thing in the face. Look into Herbert's affairs. Stare his accumulating figures out of countenance.”  “So Herbert would, I, his accumulating figures his accumulating figures are staring _Herbert_ out of countenance.”  However, I's determined manner would have my determined manner's effect, and Herbert would fall to work again. After a time Herbert would give up once more, on the plea that Herbert had not got Cobbs’s bill, or Lobbs’s, or Nobbs’s, as the case might be.  “Then, Herbert, estimate; estimate it in round numbers, and put it down.”  “What a fellow of resource I are!” I's would reply, with admiration. “Really I's business powers are very remarkable.”  I thought so too. I established with I's self, on these occasions, the reputation of a first-rate man of business,—prompt, decisive, energetic, clear, cool-headed. When I had got all I's responsibilities down upon I's list, I compared each with the bill, and ticked the bill off. I's self-approval when I ticked an entry was quite a luxurious sensation. When I had no more ticks to make, I folded all I's bills up uniformly, docketed each on the back, and tied all my bills into a symmetrical bundle. Then I did the same for Herbert (who modestly said Herbert (who modestly said he had not my administrative genius) had not I's administrative genius), and felt that I had brought Herbert (who modestly said he had not my administrative genius)'s affairs into a focus for Herbert (who modestly said he had not my administrative genius).  I's business habits had one other bright feature, which I called “leaving a Margin.” For example; supposing Herbert (who modestly said he had not my administrative genius)'s debts to be one hundred and sixty-four pounds four-and-twopence, I would say, “Leave a margin, and put Herbert’s debts down at two hundred.” Or, supposing I's own to be four times as much, I would leave a margin, and put my own down at seven hundred. I had the highest opinion of the wisdom of this  same Margin, but I am bound to acknowledge that on looking back, I deem it to have been an expensive device. For, we always ran into new debt immediately, to the full extent of the margin, and sometimes, in the sense of freedom and solvency it imparted, got pretty far on into another margin.  But there was a calm, a rest, a virtuous hush, consequent on these examinations of we's affairs that gave I, for the time, an admirable opinion of I. Soothed by I's exertions, I's method, and Herbert’s compliments, I would sit with Herbert’s's symmetrical bundle and I's own on the table before I among the stationery, and feel like a Bank of some sort, rather than a private individual.  we shut we's outer door on these solemn occasions, in order that we might not be interrupted. I had fallen into I's serene state one evening, when we heard a letter dropped through the slit in the said door, and fall on the ground. “a letter’s for I, I,” said Herbert’s, going out and coming back with a letter, “and Herbert’s hope there  is nothing the matter.” This was in allusion to its heavy black seal and border.  its was signed Trabb & Co., and its's contents were simply, that I was an honoured sir, and that Trabb & Co. begged to inform I that Mrs. J. Gargery had departed this life on Monday last at twenty minutes past six in the evening, and that I's attendance was requested at the interment on Monday next at three o’clock in the afternoon.     Chapter XXXV.   It was the first time that a grave had opened in I's road of life, and the gap a grave made in the smooth ground was wonderful. The figure of I's sister in my sister's chair by the kitchen fire, haunted I night and day. That the place could possibly be, without my sister, was something I's mind seemed unable to compass; and whereas my sister had seldom or never been in I's thoughts of late, I had now the strangest ideas that my sister was coming towards I in the street, or that my sister would presently knock at the door. In I's rooms too, with which my sister had never been at all associated, there was  at once the blankness of death and a perpetual suggestion of the sound of her voice or the turn of her's face or figure, as if her were still alive and had been often there.  Whatever my fortunes might have been, my could scarcely have recalled my's with much tenderness. But my suppose there is a shock of regret which may exist without much tenderness. Under a shock of regret which may exist without much tenderness's influence (and perhaps to make up for the want of the softer feeling) my was seized with a violent indignation against the assailant from whom her had suffered so much; and my felt that on sufficient proof my could have revengefully pursued Orlick, or any one else, to the last extremity.  Having written to Joe, to offer Joe consolation, and to assure Joe that my would come to the funeral, my passed the intermediate days in the curious state of mind my have glanced at. my went down early in the morning, and alighted at the Blue Boar in good time to walk over to the forge.  It was fine summer weather again, and, as my walked along, the  times when I was a little helpless creature, and I's sister did not spare I, vividly returned. But they returned with a gentle tone upon they that softened even the edge of Tickler. For now, the very breath of the beans and clover whispered to I's heart that the day must come when it would be well for I's memory that others walking in the sunshine should be softened as others walking in the sunshine thought of I.  At last I came within sight of the house, and saw that Trabb and Co. had put in a funereal execution and taken possession. Two dismally absurd persons, each ostentatiously exhibiting a crutch done up in a black bandage,—as if that instrument could possibly communicate any comfort to anybody,—were posted at the front door; and in one of them I recognised a postboy discharged from the Boar for turning a young couple into a sawpit on a young couple's bridal morning, in consequence of intoxication rendering it necessary for a postboy discharged from the Boar for turning a young couple into a sawpit on their bridal morning to ride a postboy discharged from the Boar for turning a young couple into a sawpit on their bridal morning's horse clasped round the neck with both arms. All the children of the village,  and most of the women, were admiring these sable warders and the closed windows of the house and forge; and as I came up, one of the two warders (the postboy) knocked at the door,—implying that I was far too much exhausted by grief to have strength remaining to knock for I.  Another sable warder (a carpenter, who had once eaten two geese for a wager) opened the door, and showed I into the best parlour. Here, Mr. Trabb had taken unto Mr. Trabb the best table, and had got all the leaves up, and was holding a kind of black Bazaar, with the aid of a quantity of black pins. At the moment of I's arrival, Mr. Trabb had just finished putting somebody’s hat into black long-clothes, like an African baby; so Mr. Trabb held out Mr. Trabb's hand for I. But I, misled by the action, and confused by the occasion, shook hands with Mr. Trabb with every testimony of warm affection.  Poor dear Joe, entangled in a little black cloak tied in a large bow under Poor dear Joe's chin, was seated apart at the upper end of the best parlour; where, as chi ef mourner, he had evidently been stationed by Trabb. When I bent down and said to he, “he, how are he?” he said, “II, I knowed her when her were a fine figure of a—” and clasped I's hand and said no more.  Biddy, looking very neat and modest in Biddy's black dress, went quietly here and there, and was very helpful. When I had spoken to Biddy, as I thought it not a time for talking I went and sat down near he, and there began to wonder in what part of the house it—her—was. The air of the parlour being faint with the smell of sweet-cake, I looked about for the table of refreshments; the table of refreshments was scarcely visible until one had got accustomed to the gloom, but there was a cut-up plum cake upon the table of refreshments, and there were cut-up oranges, and sandwiches, and biscuits, and two decanters that I knew very well as ornaments, but had never seen used in all I's life; one full of port, and one of sherry. Standing at the table of refreshments, I became conscious of the servile Pumblechook in a black cl oak and several yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing several yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing himself, and making obsequious movements to catch my attention, and making obsequious movements to catch my attention. The moment several yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing himself, and making obsequious movements to catch my attention succeeded, several yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing himself, and making obsequious movements to catch my attention came over to my (breathing sherry and crumbs), and said in a subdued voice, “May several yards of hatband, who was alternately stuffing himself, and making obsequious movements to catch my attention, my?” and did. my then descried Mr. and Mrs. Hubble; the last-named in a decent speechless paroxysm in a corner. We were all going to “follow,” and were all in course of being tied up separately (by Trabb) into ridiculous bundles.  “Which I meantersay, my,” I whispered my, as We were being what Trabb called “formed” in the parlour, two and two,—and it was dreadfully like a preparation for some grim kind of dance; “which I meantersay, my, as I would in preference have carried her to the church I, along with three or four friendly ones wot come to it with willing harts and arms, but it were considered wot the neighbours would look down on such and would be of opinions as such were wanting in respect.”  “Pocket-handkerchiefs out, all!” cri ed Mr. Trabb at this point, in a depressed business-like voice. “Pocket-handkerchiefs out! We are ready!”  So We put We's pocket-handkerchiefs to We's faces, as if We's noses were bleeding, and filed out two and two; Joe and I; Biddy and Pumblechook; Mr. and Mrs. Hubble. The remains of I's poor sister had been brought round by the kitchen door, and, it being a point of Undertaking ceremony that the six bearers must be stifled and blinded under a horrible black velvet housing with a white border, the whole looked like a blind monster with twelve human legs, shuffling and blundering along, under the guidance of two keepers,—the postboy and his comrade.  The neighbourhood, however, highly approved of these arrangements, and we were much admired as we went through the village; the more youthful and vigorous part of The neighbourhood making dashes now and then to cut we off, and lying in wait to intercept we at points of vantage. At such times the more exuberant among The neighbourhood called out in an exci ted manner on our emergence round some corner of expectancy, “_Here_ they come!” “_Here_ they are!” and our were all but cheered. In this progress I was much annoyed by the abject Pumblechook, who, being behind I, persisted all the way as a delicate attention in arranging I's streaming hatband, and smoothing I's cloak. I's thoughts were further distracted by the excessive pride of Mr. and Mrs. Hubble, who were surpassingly conceited and vainglorious in being members of so distinguished a procession.  And now the range of marshes lay clear before our, with the sails of the ships on the river growing out of the range of marshes; and our went into the churchyard, close to the graves of I's unknown parents, Philip Pirrip, late of this parish, and Also Georgiana, Wife of the Above. And there, I's sister was laid quietly in the earth, while the larks sang high above my sister, and the light wind strewed my sister with beautiful shadows of clouds and trees.  Of the conduct of the abject Pumblechook, who, being behind me, persisted all the way as a delicate attention in arranging my streaming hatband, and smoothing my cloak while this was doing, I  desire to say no more than it was all addressed to me; and that even when those noble passages were read which remind humanity how humanity brought nothing into the world and can take nothing out, and how humanity fleeth like a shadow and never continueth long in one stay, me heard me cough a reservation of the case of a young gentleman who came unexpectedly into large property. When we got back, me had the hardihood to tell me that me wished me's sister could have known me had done my sister so much honour, and to hint that my sister would have considered large property reasonably purchased at the price of my sister's death. After that, me drank all the rest of the sherry, and Mr. Hubble drank the port, and the two talked (which me have since observed to be customary in such cases) as if the two were of quite another race from the deceased, and were notoriously immortal. Finally, me went away with Mr. and Mrs. Hubble,—to make an evening of it, me felt sure, and to tell the Jolly Bargemen that me was the founder of me's fortunes and me's ea rliest benefactor.  When they were all gone, and when Trabb and Trabb's men—but not Trabb's Boy; I looked for his Boy—had crammed Trabb and his men—but not his Boy; I looked for him's mummery into bags, and were gone too, the house felt wholesomer. Soon afterwards, Biddy, Joe, and I, had a cold dinner together; but Biddy, Joe, and I dined in the best parlour, not in the old kitchen, and Joe was so exceedingly particular what Joe did with Joe's knife and fork and the saltcellar and what not, that there was great restraint upon Biddy, Joe, and I. But after dinner, when I made Joe take Joe's pipe, and when I had loitered with Joe about the forge, and when we sat down together on the great block of stone outside the forge, we got on better. I noticed that after the funeral Joe changed Joe's clothes so far, as to make a compromise between Joe's Sunday dress and working dress; in which Joe looked natural, and like the Man Joe was.  Joe was very much pleased by I's asking if Joe might sleep in Joe's own little room, and I was pleased too; for I felt that I had done rather a great thing in mak ing the request. When the shadows of evening were closing in, I took an opportunity of getting into the garden with Biddy for a little talk.  “Biddy,” said I, “I think Biddy might have written to I about these sad matters.”  “Do I, I?” said Biddy. “Biddy should have written if Biddy had thought that.”  “Don’t suppose that I mean to be unkind, Biddy, when I say I consider that Biddy ought to have thought that.”  “Do I, I?”  Biddy was so quiet, and had such an orderly, good, and pretty way with Biddy, that I did not like the thought of making Biddy's cry again. After looking a little at Biddy's downcast eyes as Biddy walked beside I, I gave up that point.  “I suppose it will be difficult for Biddy to remain here now, Biddy?”  “Oh! Biddy can’t do so, I,” said Biddy, in a tone of regret but still of quiet conviction. “Biddy have been speaking to Mrs. Hubble, and Biddy am going to Mrs. Hubble to-morrow. Biddy hope we shall be able to take some care of Mr. Gargery, together, until Mr. Gargery settles down.”  “How are Biddy g oing to live, Biddy? If Biddy want any mo—”  “How am Biddy going to live?” repeated Biddy, striking in, with a momentary flush upon Biddy's face. “Biddy’ll tell you, you. Biddy am going to try to get the place of mistress in the new school nearly finished here. Biddy can be well recommended by all the neighbours, and Biddy hope Biddy can be industrious and patient, and teach Biddy while Biddy teach others. you know, you,” pursued Biddy, with a smile, as Biddy raised Biddy's eyes to you's face, “the new schools are not like the old, but Biddy learnt a good deal from you after that time, and have had time since then to improve.”  “you think Biddy would always improve, Biddy, under any circumstances.”  “Ah! Except in Biddy's bad side of human nature,” murmured Biddy.  It was not so much a reproach as an irresistible thinking aloud. Well! you thought you would give up that point too. So, you walked a little further with Biddy, looking silently at Biddy's downcast eyes.  “you have not heard the particulars of you's sister’s death, Biddy.”  “the particulars of my sister’s death are v ery slight, poor thing. She had been in one of She's bad states—though her bad states had got better of late, rather than worse—for four days, when She came out of one of her bad states—though they had got better of late, rather than worse in the evening, just at tea-time, and said quite plainly, ‘Joe.’ As She had never said any word for a long while, I ran and fetched in Mr. Gargery from the forge. She made signs to I that She wanted Mr. Gargery to sit down close to She, and wanted I to put She's arms round Mr. Gargery's neck. So I put her arms round his neck, and She laid She's head down on Mr. Gargery's shoulder quite content and satisfied. And so She presently said ‘Joe’ again, and once ‘Pardon,’ and once ‘Pip.’ And so She never lifted her head up any more, and it was just an hour later when we laid her head down on She's own bed, because we found She was gone.”  Biddy cried; the darkening garden, and the lane, and the stars that were coming out, were blurred in I's own sight.  “Nothing was ever discovered, Biddy?”  “Nothing.”  “Do Biddy know what is become of Orlick?”  “Biddy should think from the colour of Orlick's  clothes that he is working in the quarries.”  “Of course you have seen he then?—Why are you looking at that dark tree in the lane?”  “you saw he there, on the night she died.”  “the night she died was not the last time either, you?”  “No; you have seen he there, since we have been walking here.—It is of no use,” said you, laying you's hand upon my arm, as my was for running out, “my know you would not deceive my; he was not there a minute, and he is gone.”  It revived my's utmost indignation to find that you was still pursued by he, and my felt inveterate against he. my told you so, and told you that my would spend any money or take any pains to drive he out of that country. By degrees you led my into more temperate talk, and you told my how he loved my, and how he never complained of anything,—she didn’t say, of my; you had no need; my knew what you meant,—but ever did he's duty in he's way of life, with a strong hand, a quiet tongue, and a gentle heart.  “Indeed, it would be hard to say too m uch for him,” said I; “and Biddy, we must often speak of these things, for of course I shall be often down here now. I am not going to leave him alone.”  Biddy said never a single word.  “Biddy, don’t Biddy hear I?”  “Yes, I.”  “Not to mention Biddy's calling I Mr. Pip,—which appears to I to be in bad taste, Biddy,—what do Biddy mean?”  “What do Biddy mean?” asked Biddy, timidly.  “Biddy,” said I, in a virtuously self-asserting manner, “I must request to know what Biddy mean by this?”  “By this?” said Biddy.  “Now, don’t echo,” I retorted. “Biddy used not to echo, Biddy.”  “Used not!” said Biddy. “I! Used!”  Well! I rather thought I would give up that point too. After another silent turn in the garden, I fell back on the main position.  “Biddy,” said I, “I made a remark respecting I's coming down here often, to see him, which Biddy received with a marked silence. Have the goodness, Biddy, to tell I why.”  “Are I quite sure, then, that I WILL come to see him often?” asked Biddy , stopping in the narrow garden walk, and looking at me under the stars with a clear and honest eye.  “O dear me!” said me, as if me found me compelled to give up Biddy in despair. “This really is a very bad side of human nature! Don’t say any more, if Biddy please, Biddy. This shocks me very much.”  For which cogent reason me kept Biddy at a distance during supper, and when me went up to me's own old little room, took as stately a leave of Biddy as me could, in me's murmuring soul, deem reconcilable with the churchyard and the event of the day. As often as me was restless in the night, and that was every quarter of an hour, me reflected what an unkindness, what an injury, what an injustice, Biddy had done me.  Early in the morning me was to go. Early in the morning me was out, and looking in, unseen, at one of the wooden windows of the forge. There me stood, for minutes, looking at Joe, already at work with a glow of health and strength upon his face that made it show as if the bright sun of the li fe in store for him were shining on it.  “Good-bye, dear Joe!—No, don’t wipe it off—for God’s sake, give “ him's blackened hand!—I shall be down soon and often.”  [Illustration]  “Never too soon, “,” said him, “and never too often, “!”  Biddy was waiting for “ at the kitchen door, with a mug of new milk and a crust of bread. “Biddy,” said “, when “ gave Biddy “'s hand at parting, ““ am not angry, but “ am hurt.”  “No, don’t be hurt,” Biddy pleaded quite pathetically; “let only me be hurt, if “ have been ungenerous.”  Once more, the mists were rising as “ walked away. If the mists disclosed to “, as “ suspect the mists did, that “ should _not_ come back, and that Biddy was quite right, all “ can say is,—they were quite right too.     Chapter XXXVI.   Herbert and “ went on from bad to worse, in the way of increasing Herbert and I's debts, looking into Herbert and I's affairs, leaving Margins, and the like exemplary transactions; and Time went on, whether or no, as Herbert has a way of doing; and “ came of age,—in fulfilment  of Herbert’s prediction, that I should do so before I knew where I was.  Herbert’s Herbert’s had come of age eight months before I. As Herbert’s had nothing else than Herbert’s's majority to come into, come did not make a profound sensation in Barnard’s Inn. But we had looked forward to I's one-and-twentieth birthday, with a crowd of speculations and anticipations, for we had both considered that I's guardian could hardly help saying something definite on my one-and-twentieth birthday.  I had taken care to have it well understood in Little Britain when my one-and-twentieth birthday was. On the day before my one-and-twentieth birthday, I received an official note from Wemmick, informing I that Mr. Jaggers would be glad if I would call upon Mr. Jaggers at five in the afternoon of my one-and-twentieth birthday. an official note from Wemmick, informing me that Mr. Jaggers would be glad if I would call upon him at five in the afternoon of the auspicious day convinced we that something great was to happen, and threw I into an unusual flutter when I repaired to my guardian's office, a model of punctuality.  In the outer office Wemmick offered I Wemmick's congratulations, and incidentally rubbed the side of Wemmick's nose with a folde d piece of tissue-paper that I liked the look of. But he said nothing respecting it, and motioned I with a nod into I's guardian’s room. It was November, and my guardian’s was standing before my guardian’s's fire leaning my guardian’s's back against the chimney-piece, with my guardian’s's hands under my guardian’s's coattails.  “Well, I,” said my guardian’s, “my guardian’s must call I I to-day. Congratulations, I.”  We shook hands,—he was always a remarkably short shaker,—and I thanked my guardian’s.  “Take a chair, I,” said my guardian’s.  As I sat down, and my guardian’s preserved my guardian’s's attitude and bent my guardian’s's brows at my guardian’s's boots, I felt at a disadvantage, which reminded I of that old time when I had been put upon a tombstone. The two ghastly casts on the shelf were not far from my guardian’s, and The two ghastly casts on the shelf's expression was as if The two ghastly casts on the shelf were making a stupid apoplectic attempt to attend to the conversation.  “Now my guardian’s's ,” my guardian’s began, as if I were a witness in the box, “my guardian’s am going to have a word or two with I.”  “If my guardian’s please, my guardian’s.”  “What do my guardian’s suppose,” said  Mr. Jaggers, bending forward to look at the ground, and then throwing Mr. Jaggers's head back to look at the ceiling,—“what do you suppose you are living at the rate of?”  “At the rate of, Mr. Jaggers?”  “At,” repeated Mr. Jaggers, still looking at the ceiling, “the—rate—of?” And then looked all round the room, and paused with Mr. Jaggers's pocket-handkerchief in Mr. Jaggers's hand, half-way to Mr. Jaggers's nose.  you had looked into you's affairs so often, that you had thoroughly destroyed any slight notion you might ever have had of my affairs's bearings. Reluctantly, you confessed you quite unable to answer the question. confessed seemed agreeable to Mr. JaggersMr. Jaggers Mr. Jaggers's .  “Now, Mr. Jaggers have asked _you_ a question, you,” said Mr. Jaggers. “Have you anything to ask _Mr. Jaggers_?”  “Of course it would be a great relief to you to ask Mr. Jaggers several questions, Mr. Jaggers; but you remember Mr. Jaggers's prohibition.”  “Ask one,” said Mr. Jaggers.  “Is Mr. Jaggers's benefactor to be made known to Mr. Jaggers to-day?”  “No. Ask anothe r.”  “Is that confidence to be imparted to me soon?”  “Waive that, a moment,” said Mr. Jaggers, “and ask another.”  me looked about me, but there appeared to be now no possible escape from the inquiry, “Have-me—anything to receive, Mr. Jaggers?” On that, Mr. Jaggers said, triumphantly, “Mr. Jaggers thought we should come to it!” and called to Wemmick to give me that piece of paper. Wemmick appeared, handed that piece of paper in, and disappeared.  “Now, me,” said Mr. Jaggers, “attend, if me please. me have been drawing pretty freely here; me's name occurs pretty often in Wemmick's cash-book; but me are in debt, of course?”  “me am afraid me must say yes, Mr. Jaggers.”  “me know me must say yes; don’t me?” said Mr. Jaggers.  “Yes, Mr. Jaggers.”  “Mr. Jaggers don’t ask me what me owe, because me don’t know; and if me did know, me wouldn’t tell Mr. Jaggers; me would say less. Yes, yes, Mr. Jaggers's ,” cried Mr. Jaggers, waving Mr. Jaggers's forefinger to stop me as me made a show of protesting: “it’s likely enough that me think me wouldn’t, but me would.  You’ll excuse me, but me know better than You. Now, take this piece of paper in You's hand. You have got this piece of paper? Very good. Now, unfold this piece of paper and tell me what this piece of paper is.”  “this piece of paper is a bank-note,” said You, “for five hundred pounds.”  “this piece of paper is a bank-note,” repeated me, “for five hundred pounds. And a very handsome sum of money too, me think. You consider it so?”  “How could You do otherwise!”  “Ah! But answer the question,” said me.  “Undoubtedly.”  “You consider a very handsome sum of money, undoubtedly, a handsome sum of money. Now, a very handsome sum of money, You, is You's own. a very handsome sum of money is a present to You on this day, in earnest of You's expectations. And at the rate of a very handsome sum of money per annum, and at no higher rate, You are to live until the donor of the whole appears. That is to say, You will now take You's money affairs entirely into You's own hands, and You will draw from Wemmick one hundred and twenty-five pounds per quarter, until You are in communication with the fountain-head, and no longer with t he mere agent. As I have told you before, I am the mere agent. I execute I's instructions, and I am paid for doing so. I think my instructions injudicious, but I am not paid for giving any opinion on my instructions's merits.”  I was beginning to express I's gratitude to I's benefactor for the great liberality with which I was treated, when I stopped I. “I am not paid, I,” said I, coolly, “to carry I's words to any one;” and then gathered up I's coat-tails, as I had gathered up the subject, and stood frowning at I's boots as if I suspected his boots of designs against I.  After a pause, I hinted,—  “There was a question just now, I, which I desired I to waive for a moment. I hope I am doing nothing wrong in asking a question again?”  “What is a question?” said I.  I might have known that I would never help I out; but it took I aback to have to shape a question afresh, as if a question were quite new. “Is it likely,” I said, after hesitating, “that my benefactor, Mr. Ja ggers, will soon—” there I delicately stopped.  “Will soon what?” asked Mr. Jaggers. “That’s no question as it stands, I know.”  “Will soon come to London,” said I, after casting about for a precise form of words, “or summon I anywhere else?”  “Now, here,” replied Mr. Jaggers, fixing I for the first time with Mr. Jaggers's dark deep-set eyes, “we must revert to the evening when we first encountered one another in I's village. What did Mr. Jaggers tell I then, I?”  “Mr. Jaggers told I, Mr. Jaggers, that it might be years hence when that person appeared.”  “Just so,” said Mr. Jaggers, “that’s Mr. Jaggers's answer.”  As we looked full at we, I felt I's breath come quicker in I's strong desire to get something out of Mr. Jaggers. And as I felt that my breath came quicker, and as I felt that Mr. Jaggers saw that my breath came quicker, I felt that I had less chance than ever of getting anything out of Mr. Jaggers.  “Do Mr. Jaggers suppose it will still be years hence, Mr. Jaggers?”  Mr. Jaggers shook Mr. Jaggers's head,—not in negativing the question, but in altogethe r negativing the notion that he could anyhow be got to answer it,—and the two horrible casts of the twitched faces looked, when my eyes strayed up to the two horrible casts of the twitched faces, as if the two horrible casts of the twitched faces had come to a crisis in the two horrible casts of the twitched faces's suspended attention, and were going to sneeze.  “Come!” said he, warming the backs of he's legs with the backs of he's warmed hands, “he’ll be plain with my, my. That’s a question he must not be asked. my’ll understand that better, when he tell my That’s a question that might compromise _he_. Come! he’ll go a little further with my; he’ll say something more.”  he bent down so low to frown at he's boots, that he was able to rub the calves of his legs in the pause he made.  “When that person discloses,” said he, straightening he, “my and that person will settle my's own affairs. When that person discloses, he's part in this business will cease and determine. When that person discloses, it will not be necessary for he to know anything about that person. And that’s all he have go t to say.”  We looked at one another until I withdrew I's eyes, and looked thoughtfully at the floor. From this last speech I derived the notion that Miss Havisham, for some reason or no reason, had not taken him into Miss Havisham's confidence as to Miss Havisham designing I for Estella; that him resented designing, and felt a jealousy about designing; or that him really did object to designing, and would have nothing to do with designing. When I raised my eyes again, I found that him had been shrewdly looking at I all the time, and was doing so still.  “If that is all him have to say, him,” I remarked, “there can be nothing left for I to say.”  him nodded assent, and pulled out him's thief-dreaded watch, and asked I where I was going to dine? I replied at I's own chambers, with Herbert. As a necessary sequence, I asked him if him would favour us with him's company, and him promptly accepted the invitation. But him insisted on walking home with I, in order that I might make no extra preparation for him, and first him had a letter o r two to write, and (of course) had his hands to wash. So I said I would go into the outer office and talk to his.  The fact was, that when the five hundred pounds had come into I's pocket, a thought had come into I's head which had been often there before; and it appeared to I that his was a good person to advise with concerning such thought.  his had already locked up his's safe, and made preparations for going home. his had left his's desk, brought out his's two greasy office candlesticks and stood his two greasy office candlesticks in line with the snuffers on a slab near the door, ready to be extinguished; his had raked his's fire low, put his's hat and great-coat ready, and was beating his all over the chest with his's safe-key, as an athletic exercise after business.  “his,” said I, “I want to ask his's opinion. I am very desirous to serve a friend.”  his tightened his's post-office and shook his's head, as if your opinion were dead against any fatal weakness of that sort.  “a friend,” I pursued, “is tr ying to get on in commercial life, but has no money, and finds it difficult and disheartening to make a beginning. Now I want somehow to help ying to a beginning.”  “With money down?” said Wemmick, in a tone drier than any sawdust.  “With _some_ money down,” I replied, for an uneasy remembrance shot across I of that symmetrical bundle of papers at home—“with _some_ money down, and perhaps some anticipation of I's expectations.”  “I,” said Wemmick, “Wemmick should like just to run over with I on Wemmick's fingers, if I please, the names of the various bridges up as high as Chelsea Reach. Let’s see; there’s London, one; Southwark, two; Blackfriars, three; Waterloo, four; Westminster, five; Vauxhall, six.” Wemmick had checked off each bridge in each bridge's turn, with the handle of Wemmick's safe-key on the palm of Wemmick's hand. “There’s as many as six, I see, to choose from.”  “I don’t understand Wemmick,” said I  “Choose I's bridge, I,” returned Wemmick, “and take a walk upon your bridge, and pitch I's mone y into the Thames over the centre arch of your bridge, and your know the end of it. Serve a friend with it, and you may know the end of it too,—but it’s a less pleasant and profitable end.”  I could have posted a newspaper in his mouth, his made it so wide after saying this.  “This is very discouraging,” said I.  “Meant to be so,” said his.  “Then is it his's opinion,” I inquired, with some little indignation, “that a man should never—”  “—Invest portable property in a friend?” said his. “Certainly a man should not. Unless a man wants to get rid of the friend,—and then it becomes a question how much portable property it may be worth to get rid of a man.”  “And that,” said I, “is his's deliberate opinion, his?”  “that,” his returned, “is his's deliberate opinion in this office.”  “Ah!” said I, pressing his, for I thought I saw his near a loophole here; “but would that be his's opinion at Walworth?”  “I,” his replied, with gravity, “Walworth is one place, and this office is another.  Much as the Aged is one person, and Mr. Jaggers is another. They must not be confounded together. My Walworth sentiments must be taken at Walworth; none but My's official sentiments can be taken in this office.”  “Very well,” said I, much relieved, “then I shall look My up at Walworth, My may depend upon look.”  “I,” My returned, “I will be welcome there, in a private and personal capacity.”  We had held this conversation in a low voice, well knowing I's ears to be the sharpest of the sharp. As My now appeared in My's doorway, towelling My's hands, My got on My's great-coat and stood by to snuff out the candles. We all three went into the street together, and from the door-step My turned My's way, and Mr. Jaggers and I turned Mr. Jaggers and I.  I could not help wishing more than once that evening, that Mr. Jaggers had had an Aged in Gerrard Street, or a Stinger, or a Something, or a Somebody, to unbend Mr. Jaggers's brows a little. It was an uncomfortable consideration on a twenty-firs t birthday, that coming of age at all seemed hardly worth while in such a guarded and suspicious world as he made of it. he was a thousand times better informed and cleverer than Wemmick, and yet I would a thousand times rather have had Wemmick to dinner. And he made not me alone intensely melancholy, because, after he was gone, Herbert said of Herbert, with Herbert's eyes fixed on the fire, that Herbert thought Herbert must have committed a felony and forgotten the details of a felony, Herbert felt so dejected and guilty.     Chapter XXXVII.   Deeming Sunday the best day for taking Wemmick's Walworth sentiments, I devoted the next ensuing Sunday afternoon to a pilgrimage to the Castle. On arriving before the battlements, I found the Union Jack flying and the drawbridge up; but undeterred by this show of defiance and resistance, I rang at the gate, and was admitted in a most pacific manner by the Aged.  “the Aged's son, I,” said the Aged, after securing the drawbridge, “rather had it in My son's mind that I ou might happen to drop in, and he left word that he would soon be home from he's afternoon’s walk. he is very regular in his afternoon’s walk, is he. Very regular in everything, is my's .”  I nodded at my as Wemmick Wemmick himself might have nodded, and we went in and sat down by the fireside.  “I made acquaintance with my's , I,” said my, in my's chirping way, while my warmed my's hands at the blaze, “at he's office, my expect?” I nodded. “Hah! my have heerd that my's is a wonderful hand at he's business, I?” I nodded hard. “Yes; so they tell my. his business is the Law?” I nodded harder. “Which makes it more surprising in my's ,” said my, “for he was not brought up to the Law, but to the Wine-Coopering.”  Curious to know how my stood informed concerning the reputation of Mr. Jaggers, I roared Mr. Jaggers at my. my threw I into the greatest confusion by laughing heartily and replying in a very sprightly manner, “No, to be sure; I’re right.” And  to this hour I have not the faintest notion what he meant, or what joke he thought I had made.  As I could not sit there nodding at he perpetually, without making some other attempt to interest he, I shouted at inquiry whether he's own calling in life had been “the Wine-Coopering.” By dint of straining that term out of I several times and tapping he on the chest to associate that term with he, I at last succeeded in making I's meaning understood.  “No,” said he; “the warehousing, the warehousing. First, over yonder;” he appeared to mean up the chimney, but I believe he intended to refer I to Liverpool; “and then in the City of London here. However, having an infirmity—for I am hard of hearing, he—”  I expressed in pantomime the greatest astonishment.  “—Yes, hard of hearing; having an infirmity coming upon I, I's son my son went into the Law, and my son took charge of I, and my son by little and little made out this elegant and beautiful property. But returning t o what you said, you know,” pursued the old man, again laughing heartily, “what the old man say is, No to be sure; you’re right.”  you was modestly wondering whether you's utmost ingenuity would have enabled you to say anything that would have amused the old man half as much as this imaginary pleasantry, when you was startled by a sudden click in the wall on one side of the chimney, and the ghostly tumbling open of a little wooden flap with “JOHN” upon a little wooden flap with “JOHN” upon it. the old man, following you's eyes, cried with great triumph, “the old man's son’s come home!” and we both went out to the drawbridge.  It was worth any money to see Wemmick waving a salute to you from the other side of the moat, when we both might have shaken hands across the moat with the greatest ease. the old man was so delighted to work the drawbridge, that you made no offer to assist the old man, but stood quiet until Wemmick had come across, and had presented you to Miss Skiffins; a lady by whom Wemmick was accompanied.  Miss Skiffins; a lady by whom he was accompanied was of a wooden appearance, and was, like Miss Skiffins; a lady by whom he was accompanied's escort, in the po st-office branch of the service. She might have been some two or three years younger than Wemmick, and I judged She to stand possessed of portable property. The cut of She's dress from the waist upward, both before and behind, made She's figure very like a boy’s kite; and I might have pronounced her dress a little too decidedly orange, and She's gloves a little too intensely green. But She seemed to be a good sort of fellow, and showed a high regard for the Aged. I was not long in discovering that She was a frequent visitor at the Castle; for, on our going in, and I's complimenting Wemmick on Wemmick's ingenious contrivance for announcing Wemmick to the Aged, Wemmick begged I to give I's attention for a moment to the other side of the chimney, and disappeared. Presently another click came, and another little door tumbled open with “Miss Skiffins” on another little door; then Miss Skiffins shut up and John tumbled open; then Miss Skiffins and John Miss Skiffins and John both tumbled open together, and finally shut up together. On Wemmick's retu rn from working these mechanical appliances, I expressed the great admiration with which I regarded these mechanical appliances, and he said, “Well, you know, these mechanical appliances’re both pleasant and useful to the Aged. And by George, I, it’s a thing worth mentioning, that of all the people who come to this gate, the secret of those pulls is only known to the Aged, Miss Skiffins, and he!”  “And he made these mechanical appliances,” added Miss Skiffins, “with he's own hands out of he's own head.”  While Miss Skiffins was taking off Miss Skiffins's bonnet (Miss Skiffins retained Miss Skiffins's green gloves during the evening as an outward and visible sign that there was company), he invited I to take a walk with he round the property, and see how the island looked in wintertime. Thinking that he did invited to give I an opportunity of taking he's Walworth sentiments, I seized the opportunity as soon as we were out of the Castle.  Having thought of the matter with care, I approached I's subject as if I had never hinted at my subject before. I informed he that I was anxiou s in behalf of Herbert Pocket, and I told Herbert Pocket how we had first met, and how we had fought. I glanced at Herbert Pocket's home, and at Herbert Pocket's character, and at Herbert Pocket's having no means but such as Herbert Pocket was dependent on Herbert Pocket's father for; those, uncertain and unpunctual. I alluded to the advantages I had derived in I's first rawness and ignorance from Herbert Pocket's society, and I confessed that I feared I had but ill repaid the advantages I had derived in my first rawness and ignorance from his society, and that Herbert Pocket might have done better without I and I's expectations. Keeping Miss Havisham in the background at a great distance, I still hinted at the possibility of I's having competed with Herbert Pocket in Herbert Pocket's prospects, and at the certainty of Herbert Pocket's possessing a generous soul, and being far above any mean distrusts, retaliations, or designs. For all these reasons (I told Wemmick), and because Herbert Pocket was I's young companion and friend, and I had a great affection for Herbert Pocket, I wished I's own good fortune to reflect some rays upon Herbert Pocket, and therefore I sought advice from Wemmick's experience and knowledge of men an d affairs, how I could best try with I's resources to help Herbert to some present income,—say of a hundred a year, to keep Herbert in good hope and heart,—and gradually to buy Herbert on to some small partnership. I begged Wemmick, in conclusion, to understand that I's help must always be rendered without Herbert's knowledge or suspicion, and that there was no one else in the world with whom I could advise. I wound up by laying I's hand upon Wemmick's shoulder, and saying, “I can’t help confiding in Wemmick, though I know confiding must be troublesome to Wemmick; but that is Wemmick's fault, in having ever brought I here.”  Wemmick was silent for a little while, and then said with a kind of start, “Well I know, I, Wemmick must tell I one thing. This is devilish good of I.”  “Say Wemmick’ll help I to be good then,” said I.  “I,” replied Wemmick, shaking Wemmick's head, “that’s not Wemmick's trade.”  “Nor is this Wemmick's trading-place,” said I.  “I are right,” Wemmick returned. “I hit the nail on the head. I, Wemmick’ll put on Wemmick's co nsidering-cap, and I think all you want to do may be done by degrees. Skiffins (that’s her brother) is an accountant and agent. I’ll look Skiffins (that’s her brother) up and go to work for you.”  “you thank I ten thousand times.”  “On the contrary,” said I, “I thank you, for though we are strictly in we's private and personal capacity, still it may be mentioned that there _are_ Newgate cobwebs about, and it brushes Newgate cobwebs away.”  After a little further conversation to the same effect, we returned into the Castle where we found her preparing tea. The responsible duty of making the toast was delegated to the Aged, and I was so intent upon making that I seemed to I in some danger of melting I's eyes. It was no nominal meal that we were going to make, but a vigorous reality. the Aged prepared such a hay-stack of buttered toast, that I could scarcely see the Aged over such a hay-stack of buttered toast as such a hay-stack of buttered toast simmered on an iron stand hooked on to the top-bar; while her brewed such a jorum of tea, that the pig  in the back premises became strongly excited, and repeatedly expressed his desire to participate in the entertainment.  The flag had been struck, and the gun had been fired, at the right moment of time, and I felt as snugly cut off from the rest of Walworth as if the moat were thirty feet wide by as many deep. Nothing disturbed the tranquillity of Walworth, but the occasional tumbling open of John and Miss Skiffins: which little doors were a prey to some spasmodic infirmity that made I sympathetically uncomfortable until I got used to some spasmodic infirmity that made me sympathetically uncomfortable until I got used to it. I inferred from the methodical nature of Miss Skiffins's arrangements that Miss Skiffins made tea there every Sunday night; and I rather suspected that a classic brooch Miss Skiffins wore, representing the profile of an undesirable female with a very straight nose and a very new moon, was a piece of portable property that had been given Miss Skiffins by Wemmick.  We ate the whole of the toast, and drank tea in proportion, and it was delightful to see how warm and greasy we all  got after it. The Aged especially, might have passed for some clean old chief of a savage tribe, just oiled. After a short pause of repose, Miss Skiffins—in the absence of the little servant who, it seemed, retired to the bosom of Miss Skiffins's family on Sunday afternoons—washed up the tea-things, in a trifling lady-like amateur manner that compromised none of us. Then, Miss Skiffins put on Miss Skiffins's gloves again, and us drew round the fire, and Wemmick said, “Now, Aged Parent, tip us the paper.”  Wemmick explained to Wemmick while Aged Parent got Aged Parent's spectacles out, that tip was according to custom, and that tip gave Aged Parent infinite satisfaction to read the news aloud. “Wemmick won’t offer an apology,” said Wemmick, “for Aged Parent isn’t capable of many pleasures—are Aged Parent, Aged Parent?”  “All right, Wemmick, all right,” returned Aged Parent, seeing Aged Parent spoken to.  “Only tip Aged Parent a nod every now and then when Aged Parent looks off the paper,” said Wemmick, “and Aged Parent’ll be as happy as a king. We are all attention, Aged Parent.”  “All right,  John, all right!” returned John, so busy and so pleased, that it really was quite charming.  The Aged’s reading reminded me of the classes at Mr. Wopsle’s great-aunt’s, with the pleasanter peculiarity that The Aged’s reading seemed to come through a keyhole. As The Aged’s wanted the candles close to The Aged’s, and as The Aged’s was always on the verge of putting either The Aged’s's head or the newspaper into the candles, The Aged’s required as much watching as a powder-mill. But Wemmick was equally untiring and gentle in Wemmick's vigilance, and The Aged’s read on, quite unconscious of The Aged’s's many rescues. Whenever The Aged’s looked at us, us expressed the greatest interest and amazement, and nodded until The Aged’s resumed again.  As Wemmick and Miss Skiffins sat side by side, and as me sat in a shadowy corner, me observed a slow and gradual elongation of Wemmick's mouth, powerfully suggestive of Wemmick's slowly and gradually stealing Wemmick's arm round Miss Skiffins's waist. In course of time me saw Wemmick's hand appear on the other side of Miss Skiffins; but at t hat moment Miss Skiffins neatly stopped him with the green glove, unwound him's arm again as if his arm were an article of dress, and with the greatest deliberation laid his arm on the table before Miss Skiffins. Miss Skiffins's composure while Miss Skiffins did this was one of the most remarkable sights I have ever seen, and if I could have thought this consistent with abstraction of mind, I should have deemed that Miss Skiffins performed this mechanically.  By and by, I noticed his arm beginning to disappear again, and gradually fading out of view. Shortly afterwards, him's mouth began to widen again. After an interval of suspense on I's part that was quite enthralling and almost painful, I saw him's hand appear on the other side of Miss Skiffins. Instantly, Miss Skiffins stopped his hand with the neatness of a placid boxer, took off that girdle or cestus as before, and laid that girdle or cestus on the table. Taking the table to represent the path of virtue, I am justified in stating that during the whole time of the Aged’s reading, Wem mick’s arm was straying from the path of virtue and being recalled to the path of virtue by Miss Skiffins.  At last, mick’s read mick’s into a light slumber. This was the time for Wemmick to produce a little kettle, a tray of glasses, and a black bottle with a porcelain-topped cork, representing some clerical dignitary of a rubicund and social aspect. With the aid of these appliances we all had something warm to drink, including mick’s. Miss Skiffins mixed, and I observed that Miss Skiffins and Wemmick drank out of one glass. Of course I knew better than to offer to see Miss Skiffins home, and under the circumstances I thought I had best go first; which I did, taking a cordial leave of the Aged, and having passed a pleasant evening.  Before a week was out, I received a note from Wemmick, dated Walworth, stating that Wemmick hoped Wemmick had made some advance in that matter appertaining to our private and personal capacities, and that Wemmick would be glad if I could come and see Wemmick again upon  it. So, I went out to Walworth again, and yet again, and yet again, and I saw him by appointment in Walworth several times, but never held any communication with him on the subject in or near Little Britain. The upshot was, that we found a worthy young merchant or shipping-broker, not long established in business, who wanted intelligent help, and who wanted capital, and who in due course of time and receipt would want a partner. Between him and I, secret articles were signed of which him was the subject, and I paid him half of I's five hundred pounds down, and engaged for sundry other payments: some, to fall due at certain dates out of I's income: some, contingent on I's coming into I's property. Miss Skiffins’s brother conducted the negotiation. Wemmick pervaded the negotiation throughout, but never appeared in the negotiation.  The whole business was so cleverly managed, that him had not the least suspicion of I's hand being in The whole business. I never shall forget the radiant face with which him came home one afternoo n, and told me, as a mighty piece of news, of his having fallen in with one Clarriker (the young merchant’s name), and of one Clarriker (the young merchant’s name)'s having shown an extraordinary inclination towards his, and of his's belief that the opening had come at last. Day by day as his's hopes grew stronger and his's face brighter, his must have thought me a more and more affectionate friend, for me had the greatest difficulty in restraining me's tears of triumph when me saw his so happy. At length, the thing being done, and his having that day entered one Clarriker (the young merchant’s name)'s House, and his having talked to me for a whole evening in a flush of pleasure and success, me did really cry in good earnest when me went to bed, to think that me's expectations had done some good to somebody.  A great event in me's life, the turning point of my life, now opens on me's view. But, before me proceed to narrate A great event in my life, the turning point of my life, and before me pass on to all the changes A great event in my life, the turning point of my life involved, me must give one chapter to Estella. It is not much to give to the theme that so long filled  my heart.     Chapter XXXVIII.   If that staid old house near the Green at Richmond should ever come to be haunted when my am dead, that staid old house near the Green at Richmond will be haunted, surely, by my's ghost. O the many, many nights and days through which the unquiet spirit within my haunted that staid old house near the Green at Richmond when Estella lived there! Let my's body be where my body would, my ghost was always wandering, wandering, wandering, about that staid old house near the Green at Richmond.  The lady with whom Estella was placed, Mrs. Brandley by name, was a widow, with one daughter several years older than Estella. The lady with whom Estella was placed, Mrs. Brandley by name looked young, and one daughter several years older than Estella looked old; The lady with whom Estella was placed, Mrs. Brandley by name's complexion was pink, and one daughter several years older than Estella was yellow; The lady with whom Estella was placed, Mrs. Brandley by name set up for frivolity, and one daughter several years older than Estella for theology. They were in what is called a good position, and visited, and were visited by, numbers of people. Little, if any, community of feeling subsisted between They, but the understanding was established that They were necessary to Estella, and that Estella was necessary to They. The lady with whom Estella was placed, Mrs. Brandley by name ad been a friend of Miss Havisham’s before the time of Miss Havisham’s's seclusion.  In Mrs. Brandley’s house and out of Mrs. Brandley’s house, I suffered every kind and degree of torture that Estella could cause I. The nature of I's relations with Estella, which placed I on terms of familiarity without placing I on terms of favour, conduced to I's distraction. Estella made use of I to tease other admirers, and Estella turned the very familiarity between Estella and I to the account of putting a constant slight on I's devotion to Estella. If I had been Estella's secretary, steward, half-brother, poor relation,—if I had been a younger brother of Estella appointed husband,—I could not have seemed to I further from I's hopes when I was nearest to Estella. The privilege of calling Estella by Estella's name and hearing Estella call I by I became, under the circumstances an aggravation of I's trials; and while I think it likely that The privilege of calling her by her name and hearing her call me by mine almost maddened Estella's other lovers, I know too certainly that The privilege of calling her by her name and hearing her call me by mine almost maddened I.  Estella had admirers with out end. No doubt my jealousy made an admirer of every one who went near her; but there were more than enough of them without that.  my saw her often at Richmond, my heard of her often in town, and my used often to take her and the Brandleys on the water; there were picnics, fête days, plays, operas, concerts, parties, all sorts of pleasures, through which my pursued her,—and they were all miseries to my. my never had one hour’s happiness in her's society, and yet my's mind all round the four-and-twenty hours was harping on the happiness of having her with my unto death.  Throughout this part of our intercourse,—and it lasted, as will presently be seen, for what my then thought a long time,—she habitually reverted to that tone which expressed that our's association was forced upon our. There were other times when her would come to a sudden check in that tone which expressed that our association was forced upon us and in all her's many tones, and would seem to pity my.  “Pip, Pip,” her said one evening, coming to such a check, when our sat apart at a darken ing window of the house in Richmond; “will you never take warning?”  “Of what?”  “Of me.”  “Warning not to be attracted by you, do you mean, you?”  “Do you mean! If me don’t know what you mean, me are blind.”  me should have replied that Love was commonly reputed blind, but for the reason that me always was restrained—and was was not the least of me's miseries—by a feeling that it was ungenerous to press me upon you, when you knew that you could not choose but obey Miss Havisham. me's dread always was, that this knowledge on you's part laid me under a heavy disadvantage with you's pride, and made me the subject of a rebellious struggle in you's bosom.  “At any rate,” said me, “me have no warning given me just now, for you wrote to me to come to you, this time.”  “That’s true,” said you, with a cold careless smile that always chilled me.  After looking at the twilight without, for a little while, you went on to say:—  “The time has come round when Miss Havisham wishes to have you for a day  at Satis. You are to take me there, and bring me back, if You will. She would rather me did not travel alone, and objects to receiving me's maid, for She has a sensitive horror of being talked of by such people. Can You take me?”  “Can You take me, me!”  “me can then? The day after to-morrow, if me please. me are to pay all charges out of me's purse. me hear the condition of me's going?”  “And must obey,” said I.  This was all the preparation You received for that visit, or for others like that visit; Miss Havisham never wrote to You, nor had You ever so much as seen Miss Havisham's handwriting. We went down on the next day but one, and We found Miss Havisham in the room where You had first beheld Miss Havisham, and it is needless to add that there was no change in Satis House.  Miss Havisham was even more dreadfully fond of me than Miss Havisham had been when You last saw them together; You repeat the word advisedly, for there was something positively dreadful in the energy of Miss Havisham's looks and embraces. Miss Havisham hung upon me's beauty, hung upon me's  words, hung upon her gestures, and sat mumbling her's own trembling fingers while her looked at her, as though her were devouring the beautiful creature her had reared.  From her her looked at me, with a searching glance that seemed to pry into me's heart and probe my heart's wounds. “How does her use me, me; how does her use me?” her asked me again, with her's witch-like eagerness, even in her's hearing. But, when we sat by her's flickering fire at night, her was most weird; for then, keeping her's hand drawn through her's arm and clutched in her's own hand, her extorted from her, by dint of referring back to what her had told her in her's regular letters, the names and conditions of the men whom her had fascinated; and as her dwelt upon this roll, with the intensity of a mind mortally hurt and diseased, her sat with her's other hand on her's crutch stick, and her's chin on her crutch stick, and her's wan bright eyes glaring at me, a very spectre.  me saw in this, wretched though this made me, and b itter the sense of dependence and even of degradation that it awakened,—I saw in it that Estella was set to wreak Miss Havisham’s revenge on men, and that Miss Havisham’s was not to be given to me until Miss Havisham’s had gratified it for a term. me saw in it, a reason for Miss Havisham’s being beforehand assigned to me. Sending Miss Havisham’s out to attract and torment and do mischief, Miss Havisham’s sent Miss Havisham’s with the malicious assurance that Miss Havisham’s was beyond the reach of all admirers, and that all who staked upon that cast were secured to lose. me saw in it that me, too, was tormented by a perversion of ingenuity, even while the prize was reserved for me. me saw in it the reason for me's being staved off so long and the reason for me's late guardian’s declining to commit my late guardian’s to the formal knowledge of such a scheme. In a word, me saw in Miss Havisham’s as me had Miss Havisham’s then and there before me's eyes, and always had had Miss Havisham’s before me's eyes; and me saw in this, the distinct shadow of the darkened and unhealthy house in which Miss Havisham’s's life  was hidden from the sun.  The candles that lighted that room of hers were placed in sconces on the wall. The candles that lighted that room of hers were high from the ground, and The candles that lighted that room of hers burnt with the steady dulness of artificial light in air that is seldom renewed. As I looked round at The candles that lighted that room of hers, and at the pale gloom The candles that lighted that room of hers made, and at the stopped clock, and at the withered articles of bridal dress upon the table and the ground, and at hers's own awful figure with her own awful figure with its ghostly reflection thrown large by the fire upon the ceiling and the wall's ghostly reflection thrown large by the fire upon the ceiling and the wall, I saw in everything the construction that I's mind had come to, repeated and thrown back to I. I's thoughts passed into the great room across the landing where the table was spread, and I saw it written, as it were, in the falls of the cobwebs from the centre-piece, in the crawlings of the spiders on the cloth, in the tracks of the mice as the mice betook the mice's little quickened hearts behind the panels, and in the gropings and pausings of the beetles on the floor.  It happened on the occasion of thi s visit that some sharp words arose between Estella and Miss Havisham. It was the first time I had ever seen Estella and Miss Havisham opposed.  We were seated by the fire, as just now described, and Miss Havisham still had Estella's arm drawn through Miss Havisham's own, and still clutched Estella's hand in Miss Havisham, when Estella gradually began to detach Estella. Estella had shown a proud impatience more than once before, and had rather endured that fierce affection than accepted or returned that fierce affection.  “What!” said Miss Havisham, flashing Miss Havisham's eyes upon Estella, “are Estella tired of Miss Havisham?”  “Only a little tired of Estella,” replied Estella, disengaging Estella’s arm, and moving to the great chimney-piece, where Estella stood looking down at the fire.  “Speak the truth, Estella!” cried Miss Havisham, passionately striking Miss Havisham's stick upon the floor; “Estella are tired of Miss Havisham.”  Estella looked at Miss Havisham with perfect composure, and again looked down at the fire. Estella's graceful figure and Estella's beautiful face expressed a self-possessed indifference to the wild hea t of the other, that was almost cruel.  “You stock and stone!” exclaimed Miss Havisham. “You cold, cold heart!”  “What?” said Estella, preserving Estella's attitude of indifference as Estella leaned against the great chimney-piece and only moving Estella's eyes; “do Miss Havisham reproach Estella for being cold? Miss Havisham?”  “Are Estella not?” was the fierce retort.  “Miss Havisham should know,” said Estella. “Estella am what Miss Havisham have made Estella. Take all the praise, take all the blame; take all the success, take all the failure; in short, take Estella.”  “O, look at Estella, look at Estella!” cried Miss Havisham, bitterly; “Look at Estella so hard and thankless, on the hearth where Estella was reared! Where Miss Havisham took Estella into this wretched breast when this wretched breast was first bleeding from this wretched breast's stabs, and where Miss Havisham have lavished years of tenderness upon Estella!”  [Illustration]  “At least Estella was no party to the compact,” said Estella, “for if Estella could walk and speak, when the compact was made, walk was as much as Estella could do. But what would Miss Havisham have? Miss Havisham have been very good to Estella, and Estella owe everyth ing to you. What would you have?”  “Love,” replied you.  “you have Love.”  “I have not,” said I.  “Mother by adoption,” retorted you, never departing from the easy grace of you's attitude, never raising you's voice as I did, never yielding either to anger or tenderness,—“mother by adoption, you have said that you owe everything to Mother. All you possess is freely Mother. All that Mother have given you, is at Mother's command to have again. Beyond that, you have nothing. And if Mother ask you to give Mother, what Mother never gave you, you's gratitude and duty cannot do impossibilities.”  “Did I never give you's love!” cried I, turning wildly to me. “Did I never give you a burning love, inseparable from jealousy at all times, and from sharp pain, while you speaks thus to I! Let you call I mad, let you call I mad!”  “Why should you call I mad,” returned you, “you? Does any one live, who knows what set purposes I have, half as well as you do? Does any one live, who kn ows what a steady memory you have, half as well as I do? I who have sat on this same hearth on the little stool that is even now beside you there, learning you's lessons and looking up into you's face, when your face was strange and frightened I!”  “Soon forgotten!” moaned you. “Times soon forgotten!”  “No, not forgotten,” retorted Estella,—“not forgotten, but treasured up in I's memory. When have you found I false to you's teaching? When have you found I unmindful of your lessons? When have you found I giving admission here,” I touched I's bosom with I's hand, “to anything that you excluded? Be just to I.”  “So proud, so proud!” moaned you, pushing away you's grey hair with both you's hands.  “Who taught I to be proud?” returned I. “Who praised I when I learnt I's lesson?”  “So hard, so hard!” moaned you, with you's former action.  “Who taught I to be hard?” returned I. “Who praised I when I learnt I's lesson?”  “But to be proud and hard to _I _!” Miss Havisham quite shrieked, as Miss Havisham stretched out Miss Havisham's arms. “Estella, Estella, Estella, to be proud and hard to _Miss Havisham_!”  Estella looked at Miss Havisham for a moment with a kind of calm wonder, but was not otherwise disturbed; when the moment was past, Estella looked down at the fire again.  “Estella cannot think,” said Estella, raising Estella's eyes after a silence “why Miss Havisham should be so unreasonable when Estella come to see Miss Havisham after a separation. Estella have never forgotten Miss Havisham's wrongs and your wrongs's causes. Estella have never been unfaithful to Miss Havisham or Miss Havisham's schooling. Estella have never shown any weakness that Estella can charge Estella with.”  “Would it be weakness to return Miss Havisham's love?” exclaimed Miss Havisham. “But yes, yes, Estella would call return so!”  “Estella begin to think,” said Estella, in a musing way, after another moment of calm wonder, “that Estella almost understand how this comes about. If Miss Havisham had brought up Miss Havisham wholly in the dark confinement of these rooms, and had never let Miss Havisham know that there was such a thing as the daylig ht by which she had never once seen your face,—if your had done that, and then, for a purpose had wanted she to understand the daylight and know all about the daylight, your would have been disappointed and angry?”  your, with your's head in your's hands, sat making a low moaning, and swaying your on your's chair, but gave no answer.  “Or,” said Estella,—“which is a nearer case,—if your had taught she, from the dawn of she's intelligence, with your's utmost energy and might, that there was such a thing as daylight, but that daylight was made to be she's enemy and destroyer, and she must always turn against daylight, for daylight had blighted your and would else blight her;—if your had done this, and then, for a purpose, had wanted she to take naturally to the daylight and she could not do take, your would have been disappointed and angry?”  your sat listening (or it seemed so, for I could not see your's face), but still made no answer.  “So,” said Estella, “Estella must be taken as Estella have been made. The success is not Estella,  the failure is not mine, but the two together make mine.”  Miss Havisham had settled down, mine hardly knew how, upon the floor, among the faded bridal relics with which it was strewn. mine took advantage of the moment—mine had sought one from the first—to leave the room, after beseeching Estella’s attention to Estella’s, with a movement of mine's hand. When mine left, Estella’s was yet standing by the great chimney-piece, just as Estella’s had stood throughout. Miss Havisham's grey hair was all adrift upon the ground, among the other bridal wrecks, and was a miserable sight to see.  It was with a depressed heart that mine walked in the starlight for an hour and more, about the courtyard, and about the brewery, and about the ruined garden. When mine at last took courage to return to the room, mine found Estella’s sitting at Miss Havisham's knee, taking up some stitches in one of those old articles of dress that were dropping to pieces, and of which mine have often been reminded since by the faded tatters of old banners that mine hav e seen hanging up in cathedrals. Afterwards, Estella and I played at cards, as of yore,—only Estella and I were skilful now, and played French games,—and so the evening wore away, and I went to bed.  I lay in that separate building across the courtyard. It was the first time I had ever lain down to rest in Satis House, and sleep refused to come near I. A thousand Miss Havishams haunted I. A thousand Miss Havishams was on this side of I's pillow, on that, at the head of the bed, at the foot, behind the half-opened door of the dressing-room, in the dressing-room, in the room overhead, in the room beneath,—everywhere. At last, when the night was slow to creep on towards two o’clock, I felt that I absolutely could no longer bear that separate building across the courtyard as a place to lie down in, and that I must get up. I therefore got up and put on I's clothes, and went out across the yard into the long stone passage, designing to gain the outer courtyard and walk there for the relief of I's mind. But I was no sooner in the long stone passage than I extinguished m y candle; for I saw Miss Havisham going along it in a ghostly manner, making a low cry. I followed Miss Havisham at a distance, and saw Miss Havisham go up the staircase. Miss Havisham carried a bare candle in Miss Havisham's hand, which Miss Havisham had probably taken from one of the sconces in Miss Havisham's own room, and was a most unearthly object by a bare candle's light. Standing at the bottom of the staircase, I felt the mildewed air of the feast-chamber, without seeing Miss Havisham open the door, and I heard Miss Havisham walking there, and so across into her own room, and so across again into her own room, never ceasing a low cry. After a time, I tried in the dark both to get out, and to go back, but I could do neither until some streaks of day strayed in and showed I where to lay I's hands. During the whole interval, whenever I went to the bottom of the staircase, I heard Miss Havisham's footstep, saw Miss Havisham's light pass above, and heard a low cry.  Before we left next day, there was no revival of the difference between Miss Havisham and Estella, nor was the difference between her and Estella ever revived on any similar oc casion; and there were four similar occasions, to the best of my remembrance. Nor, did Miss Havisham’s manner towards Estella in anywise change, except that my believed Havisham’s manner towards Estella to have something like fear infused among Havisham’s manner towards Estella's former characteristics.  It is impossible to turn this leaf of my's life, without putting Bentley Drummle’s name upon this leaf of my life; or my would, very gladly.  On a certain occasion when the Finches were assembled in force, and when good feeling was being promoted in the usual manner by nobody’s agreeing with anybody else, the presiding Finch called the Grove to order, forasmuch as Bentley Drummle’s had not yet toasted a lady; which, according to the solemn constitution of the society, it was Bentley Drummle’s's turn to do that day. my thought my saw Bentley Drummle’s leer in an ugly way at my while the decanters were going round, but as there was no love lost between us, saw might easily be. What was my's indignant surprise when Bentley Drummle’s called upon the company to pledge Bentley Drummle’s to “Estella!”  “Estella who?” said my  “Never y ou mind,” retorted Drummle.  “Estella of where?” said I. “Drummle are bound to say of where.” Which Drummle was, as a Finch.  “Of Richmond, gentlemen,” said Drummle, putting I. out of the question, “and a peerless beauty.”  Much Drummle knew about peerless beauties, Drummle! I. whispered Herbert.  “Herbert know a peerless beauty,” said Herbert, across the table, when the toast had been honoured.  “_Do_ Drummle?” said Drummle.  “And so do I.,” I. added, with a scarlet face.  “_Do_ I.?” said Drummle. “_O_, Lord!”  This was the only retort—except glass or crockery—that Drummle was capable of making; but, I. became as highly incensed by This as if This had been barbed with wit, and I. immediately rose in I.'s place and said that I. could not but regard it as being like Drummle's impudence to come down to that Grove,—we always talked about coming down to that Grove,—we, as a neat Parliamentary turn of expression,—down to that Grove,—we, proposing a lady of whom Drummle knew nothing. Drummle, upon this,  starting up, demanded what I meant by that? Whereupon I made him the extreme reply that I believed him knew where I was to be found.  Whether it was possible in a Christian country to get on without blood, after this, was a question on which the Finches were divided. The debate upon a question on which the Finches were divided grew so lively, indeed, that at least six more honourable members told six more, during The debate upon it, that at least six more honourable members believed _at least six more honourable members_ knew where _at least six more honourable members_ were to be found. However, it was decided at last (the Grove being a Court of Honour) that if him would bring never so slight a certificate from the lady, importing that him had the honour of the lady's acquaintance, I must express I's regret, as a gentleman and a Finch, for “having been betrayed into a warmth which.” Next day was appointed for the production (lest our honour should take cold from delay), and Next day him appeared with a polite little avowal in the lady's hand, that the lady had had the honour of dancing with him several times. This left  me no course but to regret that me had been “betrayed into a warmth which,” and on the whole to repudiate, as untenable, the idea that me was to be found anywhere. Drummle and me then sat snorting at one another for an hour, while the Grove engaged in indiscriminate contradiction, and finally the promotion of good feeling was declared to have gone ahead at an amazing rate.  me tell this lightly, but this was no light thing to me. For, me cannot adequately express what pain it gave me to think that Estella should show any favour to a contemptible, clumsy, sulky booby, so very far below the average. To the present moment, me believe it to have been referable to some pure fire of generosity and disinterestedness in me's love for Estella, that me could not endure the thought of Estella stooping to that hound. No doubt me should have been miserable whomsoever Estella had favoured; but a worthier object would have caused me a different kind and degree of distress.  It was easy for me to find out, and me did soon fin d out, that Drummle had begun to follow her closely, and that her allowed Drummle to do follow. A little while, and Drummle was always in pursuit of her, and Drummle and I crossed one another every day. Drummle held on, in a dull persistent way, and her held Drummle on; now with encouragement, now with discouragement, now almost flattering Drummle, now openly despising Drummle, now knowing Drummle very well, now scarcely remembering who Drummle was.  The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him, was used to lying in wait, however, and had the patience of The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him's tribe. Added to that, The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him had a blockhead confidence in The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him's money and in The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him's family greatness, which sometimes did The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him good service,—almost taking the place of concentration and determined purpose. So, The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him, doggedly watching her, outwatched many brighter insects, and would often uncoil The Spider, as Mr. Jaggers had called him and drop at the right nick of time.  At a certain Assembly Ball at Richmond (there used to be Assembly Balls at most places then), where her had outshone all other beaut ies, this blundering Drummle so hung about her, and with so much toleration on her's part, that ies resolved to speak to her concerning this blundering Drummle. ies took the next opportunity; which was when her was waiting for Mrs. Blandley to take her's home, and was sitting apart among some flowers, ready to go. ies was with her, for ies almost always accompanied them to and from such places.  “Are her tired, her?”  “Rather, ies.”  “her should be.”  “Say rather, her should not be; for her have her's letter to Satis House to write, before her go to sleep.”  “Recounting to-night’s triumph?” said ies “Surely a very poor one, her.”  “What do ies mean? her didn’t know there had been any.”  “her,” said ies, “do look at that fellow in the corner yonder, who is looking over here at us.”  “Why should her look at that fellow in the corner yonder, who is looking over here at us?” returned her, with her's eyes on ies instead. “What is there in that fellow in the corner yonder,—to use ies's words,—that her need look at?”  “Indeed, that is the very question ies want to ask her,” said ies “For he h as been hovering about you all night.”  “Moths, and all sorts of ugly creatures,” replied Estella, with a glance towards him, “hover about a lighted candle. Can a lighted candle help hover?”  “No,” I returned; “but cannot Estella help hover?”  “Well!” said Estella, laughing, after a moment, “perhaps. Yes. Anything I like.”  “But, Estella, do hear I speak. It makes I wretched that Estella should encourage a man so generally despised as Drummle. You know Drummle is despised.”  “Well?” said Estella.  “Estella know Drummle is as ungainly within as without. Drummle”  “Well?” said Estella.  “Estella know Drummle has nothing to recommend Drummle but money and a ridiculous roll of addle-headed predecessors; now, don’t Estella?”  “Well?” said Estella again; and each time Estella said it, Estella opened Estella's lovely eyes the wider.  To overcome the difficulty of getting past that monosyllable, I took that monosyllable from Estella, and said, repeating that monosyllable with emphasis, “Well! Then, that is why it makes I wretched.”  Now, if I could h ave believed that she favoured Drummle with any idea of making me—me—wretched, ave should have been in better heart about favoured; but in that habitual way of she, she put ave so entirely out of the question, that ave could believe nothing of the kind.  “ave,” said she, casting she's glance over the room, “don’t be foolish about its effect on ave. its may have its's effect on others, and may be meant to have. It’s not worth discussing.”  “Yes It is,” said ave, “because ave cannot bear that people should say, ‘she throws away she's graces and attractions on a mere boor, the lowest in the crowd.’”  “she can bear it,” said she.  “Oh! don’t be so proud, she, and so inflexible.”  “Calls she proud and inflexible in this breath!” said she, opening she's hands. “And in Drummle's last breath reproached she for stooping to a boor!”  “There is no doubt she do,” said ave, something hurriedly, “for ave have seen she give Drummle looks and smiles this very night, such as she never give to—ave.”  “Do she want ave then,” said  Estella, turning suddenly with a fixed and serious, if not angry, look, “to deceive and entrap Estella?”  “Do Estella deceive and entrap him, Estella?”  “Yes, and many others,—all of them but Estella. Here is Mrs. Brandley. “’ll say no more.”     And now that “ have given the one chapter to the theme that so filled “'s heart, and so often made my heart ache and ache again, “ pass on unhindered, to the event that had impended over “ longer yet; the event that had begun to be prepared for, before “ knew that the world held Estella, and in the days when Estella's baby intelligence was receiving her baby intelligence's first distortions from Miss Havisham’s wasting hands.  In the Eastern story, the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of state in the flush of conquest was slowly wrought out of the quarry, the tunnel for the rope to hold the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of state in the flush of conquest in the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of state in the flush of conquest's place was slowly carried through the leagues of rock, the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of state in the flush of conquest was slowly raised and fitted in the roof, the rope was rove to the heavy slab that was to fall on the bed of state in the flush of conquest and slowly taken through the miles of hollow to the great  iron ring. All being made ready with much labour, and the hour come, the sultan was aroused in the dead of the night, and the sharpened axe that was to sever the rope from the great iron ring was put into the sultan's hand, and the sultan struck with the sharpened axe that was to sever the rope from the great iron ring, and the rope parted and rushed away, and the ceiling fell. So, in my case; all the work, near and afar, that tended to the end, had been accomplished; and in an instant the blow was struck, and the roof of my's stronghold dropped upon my.     Chapter XXXIX.   my was three-and-twenty years of age. Not another word had my heard to enlighten my on the subject of my's expectations, and my's twenty-third birthday was a week gone. We had left Barnard’s Inn more than a year, and lived in the Temple. We's chambers were in Garden-court, down by the river.  We had for some time parted company as to We's original relations, though We continued on the best terms. Notwithstanding my's inability to settle to anything,—which my hope arose out of the restless and inc omplete tenure on which I held I's means,—I had a taste for reading, and read regularly so many hours a day. That matter of Herbert’s was still progressing, and everything with I was as I have brought everything with me down to the close of the last preceding chapter.  Business had taken Herbert’s on a journey to Marseilles. I was alone, and had a dull sense of being alone. Dispirited and anxious, long hoping that to-morrow or next week would clear I's way, and long disappointed, I sadly missed the cheerful face and ready response of I's friend.  It was wretched weather; stormy and wet, stormy and wet; and mud, mud, mud, deep in all the streets. Day after day, a vast heavy veil had been driving over London from the East, and a vast heavy veil drove still, as if in the East there were an eternity of cloud and wind. So furious had been the gusts, that high buildings in London had had the lead stripped off high buildings in town's roofs; and in the country, trees had been torn up, and sails of windmills carried away; and gloomy accounts had co me in from the coast, of shipwreck and death. Violent blasts of rain had accompanied these rages of wind, and the day just closed as me sat down to read had been the worst of all.  Alterations have been made in that part of the Temple since that time, and that part of the Temple has not now so lonely a character as that part of the Temple had then, nor is that part of the Temple so exposed to the river. We lived at the top of the last house, and the wind rushing up the river shook the last house that night, like discharges of cannon, or breakings of a sea. When the rain came with the wind rushing up the river and dashed against the windows, me thought, raising me's eyes to the windows as the windows rocked, that me might have fancied me in a storm-beaten lighthouse. Occasionally, the smoke came rolling down the chimney as though the smoke could not bear to go out into such a night; and when me set the doors open and looked down the staircase, the staircase lamps were blown out; and when me shaded me's face with me's hands and looked through the black windows (opening the black windows ever so little was out of the ques tion in the teeth of such wind and rain), I saw that the lamps in the court were blown out, and that the lamps on the bridges and the shore were shuddering, and that the coal-fires in barges on the river were being carried away before the wind like red-hot splashes in the rain.  I read with I's watch upon the table, purposing to close I's book at eleven o’clock. As I shut my book, Saint Paul’s, and all the many church-clocks in the City—some leading, some accompanying, some following—struck eleven o’clock. The sound was curiously flawed by the wind; and I was listening, and thinking how the wind assailed and tore The sound, when I heard a footstep on the stair.  What nervous folly made I start, and awfully connect a footstep on the stair with the footstep of I's dead sister, matters not. a footstep on the stair was past in a moment, and I listened again, and heard a footstep on the stair stumble in coming on. Remembering then, that the staircase-lights were blown out, I took up I's reading-lamp and went out to the stair-head. Whoever was below had stopped o n seeing my lamp, for all was quiet.  “There is some one down there, is there not?” my called out, looking down.  “Yes,” said a voice from the darkness beneath.  “What floor do my want?”  “The top. Mr. Pip.”  “That is my's name.—There is nothing the matter?”  “Nothing the matter,” returned a voice from the darkness beneath. And the man came on.  my stood with my lamp held out over the stair-rail, and the man came slowly within my lamp's light. my lamp was a shaded lamp, to shine upon a book, and my lamp's circle of light was very contracted; so that the man was in its circle of light for a mere instant, and then out of its circle of light. In a mere instant, my had seen a face that was strange to my, looking up with an incomprehensible air of being touched and pleased by the sight of my.  Moving my lamp as the man moved, my made out that the man was substantially dressed, but roughly, like a voyager by sea. That the man had long iron-grey hair. That the man's age was about sixty. That the man was a muscular man, strong on the man's legs, and that the man was browned and hardened by exposure to weather. As h e ascended the last stair or two, and the light of my lamp included us both, my saw, with a stupid kind of amazement, that e was holding out both e's hands to my.  “Pray what is e's business?” my asked e.  “e's business?” e repeated, pausing. “Ah! Yes. e will explain your business, by my's leave.”  “Do e wish to come in?”  “Yes,” e replied; “e wish to come in, my.”  my had asked e the question inhospitably enough, for my resented the sort of bright and gratified recognition that still shone in e's face. my resented the sort of bright and gratified recognition that still shone in his face, because the sort of bright and gratified recognition that still shone in his face seemed to imply that e expected my to respond to the sort of bright and gratified recognition that still shone in his face. But my took e into the room my had just left, and, having set my lamp on the table, asked e as civilly as my could to explain e.  e looked about e with the strangest air,—an air of wondering pleasure, as if e had some part in the things e admired,—and e pulled off a rough outer coat, and e's hat. Then, my saw that e's head was furrowed and bald, and that the long iron-grey hair grew only  on its sides. But, I saw nothing that in the least explained him. On the contrary, I saw him next moment, once more holding out both him's hands to I.  “What do him mean?” said I, half suspecting him to be mad.  him stopped in him's looking at I, and slowly rubbed him's right hand over him's head. “It’s disapinting to a man,” him said, in a coarse broken voice, “arter having looked for’ard so distant, and come so fur; but I’re not to blame for that,—neither on us is to blame for that. him’ll speak in half a minute. Give him half a minute, please.”  him sat down on a chair that stood before the fire, and covered him's forehead with him's large brown veinous hands. I looked at him attentively then, and recoiled a little from him; but I did not know him.  “There’s no one nigh,” said him, looking over him's shoulder; “is there?”  “Why do you, a stranger coming into I's rooms at this time of the night, ask that question?” said I.  “I’re a game one,” him returned, shaking him's head at I with a deliberate aff ection, at once most unintelligible and most exasperating; “I’m glad you’ve grow’d up, a game one! But don’t catch hold of I. you’d be sorry you to have done it.”  you relinquished the intention I had detected, for you knew I! Even yet you could not recall a single feature, but you knew I! If the wind and the rain had driven away the intervening years, had scattered all the intervening objects, had swept us to the churchyard where us first stood face to face on such different levels, you could not have known you's more distinctly than you knew I now as I sat in the chair before the fire. No need to take a file from I's pocket and show a file to you; no need to take the handkerchief from I's neck and twist the handkerchief round I's head; no need to hug I with both I's arms, and take a shivering turn across the room, looking back at you for recognition. you knew I before I gave you one of those aids, though, a moment before, you had not been conscious of remotely suspecting I's identity.  He c ame back to where I stood, and again held out both ame's hands. Not knowing what to do,—for, in I's astonishment I had lost I's self-possession,—I reluctantly gave ame both his hands. ame grasped both his hands heartily, raised both his hands to ame's lips, kissed both his hands, and still held both his hands.  “I acted noble, I,” said ame. “Noble, Pip! And I have never forgot acted!”  At a change in ame's manner as if ame were even going to embrace I, I laid a hand upon ame's breast and put ame away.  “Stay!” said I “Keep off! If ame are grateful to I for what I did when I was a little child, I hope ame have shown ame's gratitude by mending ame's way of life. If ame have come here to thank I, come was not necessary. Still, however ame have found I out, there must be something good in the feeling that has brought ame here, and I will not repulse ame; but surely ame must understand that—I—”  I's attention was so attracted by the singularity of ame's fixed look at I, that the words died away on I's tongue.  “I was a-saying,” ame observed, whe n we had confronted we in silence, “that surely I must understand. What, surely must I understand?”  “That I cannot wish to renew that chance intercourse with I of long ago, under these different circumstances. I am glad to believe I have repented and recovered I. I am glad to tell I so. I am glad that, thinking I deserve to be thanked, I have come to thank I. But our ways are different ways, none the less. I are wet, and I look weary. Will I drink something before I go?”  I had replaced I's neckerchief loosely, and had stood, keenly observant of I, biting a long end of his neckerchief. “I think,” I answered, still with a long end of it at I's mouth and still observant of I, “that I _will_ drink (I thank I) afore I go.”  There was a tray ready on a side-table. I brought a tray to the table near the fire, and asked I what I would have? I touched one of the bottles without looking at one of the bottles or speaking, and I made I some hot rum and water. I tried to keep I's hand steady wh ile I did so, but his look at I as his leaned back in his's chair with the long draggled end of his's neckerchief between his's teeth—evidently forgotten—made I's hand very difficult to master. When at last I put the glass to his, I saw with amazement that his's eyes were full of tears.  Up to this time I had remained standing, not to disguise that I wished his gone. But I was softened by the softened aspect of his, and felt a touch of reproach. “I hope,” said I, hurriedly putting something into a glass for I, and drawing a chair to the table, “that his will not think I spoke harshly to his just now. I had no intention of doing spoke, and I am sorry for it if I did. I wish his well and happy!”  As I put a glass to I's lips, his glanced with surprise at the end of his neckerchief, dropping from his's mouth when his opened his mouth, and stretched out his's hand. I gave his I, and then his drank, and drew his's sleeve across his's eyes and forehead.  “How are his living?” I asked his.  “his’ve been a sheep- farmer, stock-breeder, other trades besides, away in the new world,” said he; “many a thousand mile of stormy water off from this.”  “I hope he have done well?”  “he’ve done wonderfully well. There’s others went out alonger he as has done well too, but no man has done nigh as well as he. he’m famous for done.”  “I am glad to hear it.”  “I hope to hear he say so, I's .”  Without stopping to try to understand those words or the tone in which those words were spoken, I turned off to a point that had just come into I's mind.  “Have he ever seen a messenger he once sent to I,” I inquired, “since a messenger you once sent to me undertook that trust?”  “Never set eyes upon a messenger you once sent to me. he warn’t likely to it.”  “a messenger you once sent to me came faithfully, and a messenger you once sent to me brought I the two one-pound notes. I was a poor boy then, as he know, and to a poor boy the two one-pound notes were a little fortune. But, like he, I have done well since, and he must let I pay the two one-pound notes back. he can put the two one-pound notes to some other poor boy’s use.” I took out I's purse.  he watched I as I laid my purse u pon the table and opened it, and he watched me as me separated two one-pound notes from it's contents. two one-pound notes were clean and new, and me spread two one-pound notes out and handed two one-pound notes over to he. Still watching me, he laid two one-pound notes one upon the other, folded two one-pound notes long-wise, gave two one-pound notes a twist, set fire to two one-pound notes at the lamp, and dropped the ashes into the tray.  “May he make so bold,” he said then, with a smile that was like a frown, and with a frown that was like a smile, “as ask me _how_ me have done well, since me and he was out on them lone shivering marshes?”  “How?”  “Ah!”  he emptied he's glass, got up, and stood at the side of the fire, with he's heavy brown hand on the mantel-shelf. he put a foot up to the bars, to dry and warm a foot, and a foot began to steam; but, he neither looked at a foot, nor at the fire, but steadily looked at me. It was only now that me began to tremble.  When me's lips had parted, and had shaped some words that were without sound, me forced me to tell he (though me could not do  it distinctly), that I had been chosen to succeed to some property.  “Might a mere warmint ask what property?” said he.  I faltered, “I don’t know.”  “Might a mere warmint ask whose property?” said he.  I faltered again, “I don’t know.”  “Could he make a guess, he wonder,” said he, “at I's income since I come of age! As to the first figure now. Five?”  With I's heart beating like a heavy hammer of disordered action, I rose out of I's chair, and stood with I's hand upon the back of my chair, looking wildly at he.  “Concerning a guardian,” he went on. “There ought to have been some guardian, or such-like, whiles I was a minor. Some lawyer, maybe. As to the first letter of Some lawyer's name now. Would the first letter of that lawyer’s name be J?”  All the truth of I's position came flashing on I; and my position's disappointments, dangers, disgraces, consequences of all kinds, rushed in in such a multitude that I was borne down by its disappointments, dangers, disgraces, consequences of all kinds and had to struggle for every breath I drew.  “Put it,” he resumed, “as the employer of that  lawyer whose name begun with a J, and might be Jaggers,—put it as he had come over sea to Portsmouth, and had landed there, and had wanted to come on to you. ‘However, you have found he out,’ you says just now. Well! However, did he find you out? Why, he wrote from Portsmouth to a person in London, for particulars of you's address. a person in London's name? Why, Wemmick.”  you could not have spoken one word, though it had been to save you's life. you stood, with a hand on the chair-back and a hand on you's breast, where you seemed to be suffocating,—I stood so, looking wildly at he, until you grasped at the chair, when the room began to surge and turn. he caught you, drew you to the sofa, put you up against the cushions, and bent on one knee before you, bringing the face that you now well remembered, and that you shuddered at, very near to you.  “Yes, you, dear boy, he’ve made a gentleman on you! It’s me wot has done it! he swore that time, sure as ever he earned a guinea, a guinea should go to you. he swore arterw ards, sure as ever I spec’lated and got rich, you should get rich. I lived rough, that you should live smooth; I worked hard, that you should be above work. What odds, you? Do I tell it, fur you to feel a obligation? Not a bit. I tell it, fur you to know as that there hunted dunghill dog wot you kep life in, got his head so high that his could make a gentleman,—and, you, you’re his!”  The abhorrence in which you held his, the dread you had of his, the repugnance with which you shrank from his, could not have been exceeded if his had been some terrible beast.  “Look’ee here, you. I’m you's second father. you’re I's son,—more to I nor any son. I’ve put away money, only for you to spend. When I was a hired-out shepherd in a solitary hut, not seeing no faces but faces of sheep till I half forgot wot men’s and women’s faces wos like, I see you. I drops I's knife many a time in a solitary hut when I was a-eating I's dinner or I's supper, and I says, ‘Here’s you again, a looking at I whiles I e ats and drinks!’ I see you there a many times, as plain as ever I see you on them misty marshes. ‘Lord strike I dead!’ I says each time,—and I goes out in the air to say it under the open heavens,—‘but wot, if I gets liberty and money, I’ll make that boy a gentleman!’ And I done make. Why, look at that boy, that boy! Look at these here lodgings of that boy, fit for a lord! A lord? Ah! that boy shall show money with lords for wagers, and beat lords!”  In that boy's heat and triumph, and in that boy's knowledge that I had been nearly fainting, that boy did not remark on I's reception of all this. It was the one grain of relief I had.  “Look’ee here!” that boy went on, taking I's watch out of I's pocket, and turning towards that boy a ring on I's finger, while I recoiled from that boy's touch as if that boy had been a snake, “my watch and a beauty: _a ring on my finger’s_ a gentleman’s, that boy hope! A diamond all set round with rubies; _A diamond all set round with rubies’s_ a gentleman’s, that boy hope! Look at I's linen; fine and beautiful! Look at I's clothes; better ain’t to be got! And I's books to o,” turning his eyes round the room, “mounting up, on their shelves, by hundreds! And you read their shelves; don’t you? his see you’d been a reading of their shelves when his come in. Ha, ha, ha! you shall read their shelves to his, you! And if their shelves’re in foreign languages wot his don’t understand, his shall be just as proud as if his did.”  Again his took both you's hands and put both my hands to his's lips, while you's blood ran cold within you.  “Don’t you mind talking, you,” said his, after again drawing his's sleeve over his's eyes and forehead, as the click came in his's throat which you well remembered,—and his was all the more horrible to you that his was so much in earnest; “you can’t do better nor keep quiet, you. you ain’t looked slowly forward to this as his have; you wosn’t prepared for this as his wos. But didn’t you never think it might be his?”  “O no, no, no,” you returned, “Never, never!”  “Well, you see it _wos_ his, and single-handed. Never a soul in it but his and Mr. Jaggers.”  “Was there no one else?” you asked.  “No,” said  he, with a glance of surprise: “who else should there be? And, dear boy, how good looking dear boy have growed! There’s bright eyes somewheres—eh? Isn’t there bright eyes somewheres, wot dear boy love the thoughts on?”  O Estella, Estella!  “They shall be dear boy, dear boy, if money can buy They. Not that a gentleman like dear boy, so well set up as dear boy, can’t win ’em off of a gentleman like you, so well set up as you's own game; but money shall back dear boy! Let dear boy finish wot dear boy was a telling dear boy, dear boy. From that there hut and that there hiring-out, dear boy got money left dear boy by dear boy's master (which died, and had been the same as dear boy), and got dear boy's liberty and went for dear boy. In every single thing dear boy went for, dear boy went for dear boy. ‘Lord strike a blight upon it,’ dear boy says, wotever it was dear boy went for, ‘if it ain’t for him!’ It all prospered wonderful. As dear boy giv’ dear boy to understand just now, dear boy’m famous for it. It was the money left dear boy, and the gains of the first few year wot dear boy sent home to Mr. Jaggers—all for dear boy—when Mr. Jaggers first come arter dear boy, agreeable to dear boy's letter.”  O  that he had never come! That he had left me at the forge,—far from contented, yet, by comparison happy!  “And then, he, it was a recompense to me, look’ee here, to know in secret that me was making a gentleman. The blood horses of them colonists might fling up the dust over me as me was walking; what do me say? me says to me, ‘me’m making a better gentleman nor ever _you_’ll be!’ When one of them colonists says to another, ‘he was a convict, a few year ago, and is a ignorant common fellow now, for all he’s lucky,’ what do me say? me says to me, ‘If me ain’t a gentleman, nor yet ain’t got no learning, me’m the owner of such. All on you owns stock and land; which on you owns a brought-up London gentleman?’ This way me kep me a-going. And This way me held steady afore me's mind that me would for certain come one day and see me's , and make me known to he, on he's own ground.”  He laid He's hand on me's shoulder. me shuddered at the thought that for anything me knew, his hand might be stained wit h blood.  “It warn’t easy, Pip, for me to leave them parts, nor yet it warn’t safe. But me held to it, and the harder it was, the stronger me held, for me was determined, and me's mind firm made up. At last me done it. Pip, me done it!”  me tried to collect me's thoughts, but me was stunned. Throughout, me had seemed to me to attend more to the wind and the rain than to me; even now, me could not separate me's voice from the wind and the rain, though the wind and the rain were loud and me's was silent.  “Where will me put me?” me asked, presently. “me must be put somewheres, me.”  “To sleep?” said me  “Yes. And to sleep long and sound,” me answered; “for me’ve been sea-tossed and sea-washed, months and months.”  “me's friend and companion,” said me, rising from the sofa, “is absent; me must have My friend and companion's room.”  “My friend and companion won’t come back to-morrow; will My friend and companion?”  “No,” said me, answering almost mechanically, in spite of me's utmost efforts; “not to-morrow.”  “Because, look’ee here, me,” me said, dropping me's voice, and layi ng a long finger on my breast in an impressive manner, “caution is necessary.”  “How do my mean? Caution?”  “By G——, it’s Death!”  “What’s death?”  “my was sent for life. It’s death to come back. There’s been overmuch coming back of late years, and my should of a certainty be hanged if took.”  Nothing was needed but this; the wretched man, after loading my with the wretched man's gold and silver chains for years, had risked the wretched man's life to come to my, and my held his life there in my's keeping! If my had loved the wretched man instead of abhorring the wretched man; if my had been attracted to the wretched man by the strongest admiration and affection, instead of shrinking from the wretched man with the strongest repugnance; it could have been no worse. On the contrary, it would have been better, for the wretched man's preservation would then have naturally and tenderly addressed my's heart.  my's first care was to close the shutters, so that no light might be seen from without, and then to close and make fast the doors. While my did so, the wretched man stood at the table drinking rum and ea ting biscuit; and when I saw him thus engaged, I saw I's convict on the marshes at my convict's meal again. It almost seemed to I as if my convict must stoop down presently, to file at my convict's leg.  When I had gone into Herbert’s room, and had shut off any other communication between Herbert’s room and the staircase than through Herbert’s room, I asked Herbert’s if Herbert’s would go to bed? Herbert’s said yes, but asked I for some of I's “gentleman’s linen” to put on in the morning. I brought some of my “gentleman’s linen” to put on in the morning out, and laid some of my “gentleman’s linen” to put on in the morning ready for Herbert’s, and I's blood again ran cold when Herbert’s again took I by both hands to give I good-night.  I got away from Herbert’s, without knowing how I did got, and mended the fire in Herbert’s roomour , and sat down by the fire, afraid to go to bed. For an hour or more, I remained too stunned to think; and it was not until I began to think, that I began fully to know how wrecked I was, and how the ship in which I had sailed was gone to pieces.  Miss Havisham’s intentions towards I, all a m ere dream; Estella not designed for me; me only suffered in Satis House as a convenience, a sting for the greedy relations, a model with a mechanical heart to practise on when no other practice was at hand; those were the first smarts me had. But, sharpest and deepest pain of all,—it was for the convict, guilty of me knew not what crimes, and liable to be taken out of those rooms where me sat thinking, and hanged at the Old Bailey door, that me had deserted Joe.  me would not have gone back to Joe now, me would not have gone back to Biddy now, for any consideration; simply, me suppose, because me's sense of me's own worthless conduct to them was greater than every consideration. No wisdom on earth could have given me the comfort that me should have derived from them's simplicity and fidelity; but me could never, never, undo what me had done.  In every rage of wind and rush of rain, me heard pursuers. Twice, me could have sworn there was a knocking and whispering at the outer door. With these fears upon  me, me began either to imagine or recall that me had had mysterious warnings of this man’s approach. That, for weeks gone by, me had passed faces in the streets which me had thought like this man’s. That these likenesses had grown more numerous, as this man’s, coming over the sea, had drawn nearer. That this man’s's wicked spirit had somehow sent these messengers to me, and that now on this stormy night this man’s was as good as this man’s's word, and with me.  Crowding up with these reflections came the reflection that me had seen this man’s with me's childish eyes to be a desperately violent man; that me had heard that other convict reiterate that that other convict had tried to murder this man’s; that me had seen this man’s down in the ditch tearing and fighting like a wild beast. Out of such remembrances me brought into the light of the fire a half-formed terror that it might not be safe to be shut up there with this man’s in the dead of the wild solitary night. a half-formed terror that it might not be safe to be shut up there with him in the dead of the wild solitary night dilated until a half-formed terror that it might not be safe to be shut up there with him in the dead of the wild solitary night filled the room, and impelled me to take a candle and go in and look at me's dreadful burden .  He had rolled a handkerchief round He's head, and He's face was set and lowering in He's sleep. But He was asleep, and quietly too, though He had a pistol lying on the pillow. Assured of was, I softly removed the key to the outside of He's door, and turned the key to the outside of his door on He before I again sat down by the fire. Gradually I slipped from the chair and lay on the floor. When I awoke without having parted in I's sleep with the perception of I's wretchedness, the clocks of the Eastward churches were striking five, the candles were wasted out, the fire was dead, and the wind and rain intensified the thick black darkness.  THIS IS THE END OF THE SECOND STAGE OF PIP’S EXPECTATIONS.     Chapter XL.   It was fortunate for I that I had to take precautions to ensure (so far as I could) the safety of I's ; for, this thought pressing on I when I awoke, held other thoughts in a confused concourse at a distance.  The impossibility of keeping He concealed in the chambers was self-evident. It coul d not be done, and the attempt to do it would inevitably engender suspicion. True, I had no Avenger in I's service now, but I was looked after by an inflammatory old female, assisted by an animated rag-bag whom an inflammatory old female called an inflammatory old female's niece, and to keep a room secret from them would be to invite curiosity and exaggeration. them had weak eyes, which I had long attributed to them's chronically looking in at keyholes, and them were always at hand when not wanted; indeed were was them's only reliable quality besides larceny. Not to get up a mystery with them, I resolved to announce in the morning that I's uncle had unexpectedly come from the country.  This course I decided on while I was yet groping about in the darkness for the means of getting a light. Not stumbling on the means of getting a light after all, I was fain to go out to the adjacent Lodge and get the watchman there to come with the watchman's lantern. Now, in groping I's way down the black staircase I fell over something, and something was a man crouc hing in a corner.  As the man made no answer when I asked the man what the man did there, but eluded I's touch in silence, I ran to the Lodge and urged the watchman to come quickly; telling the watchman of the incident on the way back. The wind being as fierce as ever, we did not care to endanger the light in the lantern by rekindling the extinguished lamps on the staircase, but we examined the staircase from the bottom to the top and found no one there. It then occurred to I as possible that the man might have slipped into I's rooms; so, lighting I's candle at the watchman's, and leaving the watchman standing at the door, I examined my rooms carefully, including the room in which I's dreaded guest lay asleep. All was quiet, and assuredly no other man was in my rooms.  It troubled I that there should have been a lurker on the staircase, on that night of all nights in the year, and I asked the watchman, on the chance of eliciting some hopeful explanation as I handed the watchman a dram at the door, whether the watchman had admitted at  his gate any gentleman who had perceptibly been dining out? Yes, his said; at different times of the night, three. One lived in Fountain Court, and the other two lived in the Lane, and his had seen them all go home. Again, the only other man who dwelt in the house of which my chambers formed a part had been in the country for some weeks, and the only other man who dwelt in the house of which my chambers formed a part certainly had not returned in the night, because we had seen the only other man who dwelt in the house of which my chambers formed a part's door with the only other man who dwelt in the house of which my chambers formed a part's seal on his door with his seal on it as we came upstairs.  “The night being so bad, my,” said his, as his gave my back my's glass, “uncommon few have come in at his gate. Besides three, his don’t call to mind another since about eleven o’clock, when a stranger asked for my.”  “my's uncle,” my muttered. “Yes.”  “my saw My uncle, my?”  “Yes. Oh yes.”  “Likewise the person with My uncle?”  “Person with My uncle!” my repeated.  “his judged the person with him to be with My uncle,” returned his. “My uncle stopped, when My uncle stopped to make inquiry of his, and the person with him took this way wh en he took this way.”  “What sort of person?”  The watchman had not particularly noticed; The watchman should say a working person; to the best of The watchman's belief, The watchman had a dust-coloured kind of clothes on, under a dark coat. The watchman made more light of the matter than I did, and naturally; not having I's reason for attaching weight to the matter.  When I had got rid of The watchman, which I thought it well to do without prolonging explanations, I's mind was much troubled by these two circumstances taken together. Whereas these two circumstances taken together were easy of innocent solution apart,—as, for instance, some diner out or diner at home, who had not gone near The watchman's gate, might have strayed to I's staircase and dropped asleep there,—and I's nameless visitor might have brought some one with my nameless visitor to show my nameless visitor the way,—still, joined, these two circumstances taken together had an ugly look to one as prone to distrust and fear as the changes of a few hours had made I.  I lighted I's fire, which burnt with a raw pale flare at that time of the morning, and fell into a doze  before it. I seemed to have been dozing a whole night when the clocks struck six. As there was full an hour and a half between I and daylight, I dozed again; now, waking up uneasily, with prolix conversations about nothing, in I's ears; now, making thunder of the wind in the chimney; at length, falling off into a profound sleep from which daylight woke I with a start.  All this time I had never been able to consider I's own situation, nor could I do so yet. I had not the power to attend to my own situation. I was greatly dejected and distressed, but in an incoherent wholesale sort of way. As to forming any plan for the future, I could as soon have formed an elephant. When I opened the shutters and looked out at the wet wild morning, all of a leaden hue; when I walked from room to room; when I sat down again shivering, before the fire, waiting for I's laundress to appear; I thought how miserable I was, but hardly knew why, or how long I had been so, or on what day of the week I made the reflection , or even who I was that made it.  At last, the old woman and the niece came in,—the latter with a head not easily distinguishable from the niece's dusty broom,—and testified surprise at sight of I and the fire. To whom I imparted how I's uncle had come in the night and was then asleep, and how the breakfast preparations were to be modified accordingly. Then I washed and dressed while the old woman and the niece knocked the furniture about and made a dust; and so, in a sort of dream or sleep-waking, I found I sitting by the fire again, waiting for—my uncle—to come to breakfast.  By and by, my uncle's door opened and my uncle came out. I could not bring I to bear the sight of my uncle, and I thought my uncle had a worse look by daylight.  “I do not even know,” said I, speaking low as my uncle took my uncle's seat at the table, “by what name to call my uncle. I have given out that my uncle are I's uncle.”  “That’s it, I! Call my uncle uncle.”  “my uncle assumed some name, I suppose, on board ship?”  “Yes, I. my uncle took the name of Provis.”  “Do my uncle mean to keep  that name?”  “Why, yes, dear boy, that name’s as good as another,—unless dear boy’d like another.”  “What is your real name?” dear boy asked your in a whisper.  “Magwitch,” your answered, in the same tone; “chrisen’d Abel.”  “What were your brought up to be?”  “A warmint, dear boy.”  your answered quite seriously, and used A warmint as if A warmint denoted some profession.  “When your came into the Temple last night—” said dear boy, pausing to wonder whether last night could really have been last night.  “Yes, dear boy?”  “When your came in at the gate and asked the watchman the way here, had your any one with your?”  “With your? No, dear boy.”  “But there was some one there?”  “your didn’t take particular notice,” your said, dubiously, “not knowing the ways of the place. But your think there _was_ a person, too, come in alonger your.”  “Are your known in London?”  “your hope not!” said your, giving your's neck a jerk with your's forefinger that made dear boy turn hot and sick.  “Were your known in London, once?”  “Not over and above, dear boy r boy. I was in the provinces mostly.”  “Were I—tried—in London?”  “Which time?” said I, with a sharp look.  “The last time.”  I nodded. “First knowed Mr. Jaggers that way. Mr. Jaggers was for I.”  It was on my lips to ask I what I was tried for, but I took up a knife, gave a knife a flourish, and with the words, “And what I done is worked out and paid for!” fell to at I's breakfast.  I ate in a ravenous way that was very disagreeable, and all I's actions were uncouth, noisy, and greedy. Some of I's teeth had failed I since my saw I eat on the marshes, and as I turned I's food in I's mouth, and turned I's head sideways to bring I's strongest fangs to bear upon his food, I looked terribly like a hungry old dog. If my had begun with any appetite, I would have taken any appetite away, and my should have sat much as my did,—repelled from I by an insurmountable aversion, and gloomily looking at the cloth.  “I’m a heavy grubber, my,” I said, as a polite kind of apology when I made an end of hi s meal, “but I always was. If it had been in I's constitution to be a lighter grubber, I might ha’ got into lighter trouble. Similarly, I must have I's smoke. When I was first hired out as shepherd t’other side the world, it’s I's belief I should ha’ turned into a molloncolly-mad sheep I, if I hadn’t a had I's smoke.”  As I said so, I got up from table, and putting I's hand into the breast of the pea-coat I wore, brought out a short black pipe, and a handful of loose tobacco of the kind that is called Negro-head. Having filled a short black pipe, I put a handful of loose tobacco of the kind that is called Negro-head back again, as if I's pocket were a drawer. Then, I took a live coal from the fire with the tongs, and lighted a short black pipe at a live coal, and then turned round on the hearth-rug with I's back to the fire, and went through I's favourite action of holding out both I's hands for mine.  “And this,” said I, dandling both his hands up and down in I, as I puffed at I's pipe,—“and this is the gentleman what I made! The real genuine One! It do es me good fur to look at you, you. All me stip’late, is, to stand by and look at you, you!”  you released you's hands as soon as you could, and found that you was beginning slowly to settle down to the contemplation of you's condition. What you was chained to, and how heavily, became intelligible to you, as you heard me's hoarse voice, and sat looking up at me's furrowed bald head with its iron grey hair at the sides.  “me mustn’t see me's gentleman a footing it in the mire of the streets; there mustn’t be no mud on _my gentleman a's_ boots. my gentleman a must have horses, you! Horses to ride, and horses to drive, and horses for my gentleman a's servant to ride and drive as well. Shall colonists have colonists's horses (and blood ’uns, if you please, good Lord!) and not my gentleman a? No, no. We’ll show ’em another pair of shoes than that, you; won’t We?”  me took out of me's pocket a great thick pocket-book, bursting with papers, and tossed a great thick pocket-book, bursting with papers on the table.  “There’s something worth spending in a great thick pocket-book, bursting with papers, you. It’s yo urn. All I’ve got ain’t mine; All I’ve got’s yourn. Don’t yourn be afeerd on it. There’s more where that come from. I’ve come to the old country fur to see I's gentleman spend my gentleman's money _like_ a gentleman. spend’ll be _I's_ pleasure. _I's_ pleasure ’ull be fur to see my gentleman do spend. And blast you all!” I wound up, looking round the room and snapping I's fingers once with a loud snap, “blast you every one, from the judge in his wig, to the colonist a stirring up the dust, I’ll show a better gentleman than the whole kit on yourn put together!”  “Stop!” said yourn, almost in a frenzy of fear and dislike, “yourn want to speak to I. yourn want to know what is to be done. yourn want to know how I are to be kept out of danger, how long I are going to stay, what projects I have.”  “Look’ee here, yourn,” said I, laying I's hand on yourn's arm in a suddenly altered and subdued manner; “first of all, look’ee here. I forgot I half a minute ago. What I said was low; that’s what it was; low. Look’ee here, yourn. Look over it. I ain ’t a-going to be low.”  “First,” I resumed, half groaning, “what precautions can be taken against your being recognised and seized?”  “No, I,” your said, in the same tone as before, “that don’t go first. Lowness goes first. your ain’t took so many year to make a gentleman, not without knowing what’s due to a gentleman. Look’ee here, I. your was low; that’s what your was; low. Look over it, I.”  Some sense of the grimly-ludicrous moved I to a fretful laugh, as I replied, “I _have_ looked over it. In Heaven’s name, don’t harp upon it!”  “Yes, but look’ee here,” your persisted. “I, your ain’t come so fur, not fur to be low. Now, go on, I. I was a saying—”  “How are you to be guarded from the danger you have incurred?”  “Well, I, the danger you have incurred ain’t so great. Without your was informed agen, the danger you have incurred ain’t so much to signify. There’s Jaggers, and there’s Wemmick, and there’s I. Who else is there to inform?”  “Is there no chance person who might identify your in the street?” sai d I.  “Well,” he returned, “there ain’t many. Nor yet he don’t intend to advertise he in the newspapers by the name of A.M. come back from Botany Bay; and years have rolled away, and who’s to gain by rolled? Still, look’ee here, Pip. If the danger had been fifty times as great, he should ha’ come to see Pip, mind Pip, just the same.”  “And how long do he remain?”  “How long?” said he, taking he's black pipe from he's mouth, and dropping he's jaw as he stared at Pip. “he’m not a-going back. he’ve come for good.”  “Where are he to live?” said I. “What is to be done with he? Where will he be safe?”  “Pip,” he returned, “there’s disguising wigs can be bought for money, and there’s hair powder, and spectacles, and black clothes,—shorts and what not. Others has done it safe afore, and what others has done afore, others can do agen. As to the where and how of living, Pip, give he Pip's own opinions on living.”  “he take it smoothly now,” said Pip, “but he were very serious last night, when he ou swore it was Death.”  “And so I swear it is Death,” said I, putting I's pipe back in I's mouth, “and Death by the rope, in the open street not fur from this, and it’s serious that you should fully understand it to be so. What then, when that’s once done? Here I am. To go back now ’ud be as bad as to stand ground—worse. Besides, you, I’m here, because I’ve meant it by you, years and years. As to what I dare, I’m a old bird now, as has dared all manner of traps since first a old bird was fledged, and I’m not afeerd to perch upon a scarecrow. If there’s Death hid inside of a scarecrow, there is, and let a old bird come out, and I’ll face a old bird, and then I’ll believe in a old bird and not afore. And now let I have a look at I's gentleman agen.”  Once more, I took I by both hands and surveyed I with an air of admiring proprietorship: smoking with great complacency all the while.  It appeared to I that I could do no better than secure I some quiet lodging hard by, of which I might take possession when Herbert ret urned: whom I expected in two or three days. That the secret must be confided to Herbert as a matter of unavoidable necessity, even if I could have put the immense relief I should derive from sharing the secret with Herbert out of the question, was plain to I. But it was by no means so plain to Mr. Provis (I resolved to call him by that name), who reserved him's consent to Herbert's participation until him should have seen Herbert and formed a favourable judgment of Herbert's physiognomy. “And even then, Herbert,” said him, pulling a greasy little clasped black Testament out of him's pocket, “we’ll have Herbert on Herbert's oath.”  To state that him carried a greasy little clasped black Testament solely to swear people on in cases of emergency, would be to state what I never quite established; but this I can say, that I never knew him put a greasy little clasped black Testament to any other use. a greasy little clasped black Testament a greasy little clasped black Testament had the appearance of having been stolen from some court of justice, and perhaps him's knowledge of a greasy little clasped black Testament's antecedents, combined with him's o wn experience in that wise, gave him a reliance on that wise's powers as a sort of legal spell or charm. On this first occasion of him's producing that wise, I recalled how him had made I swear fidelity in the churchyard long ago, and how him had described him last night as always swearing to him's resolutions in him's solitude.  As him was at present dressed in a seafaring slop suit, in which him looked as if him had some parrots and cigars to dispose of, I next discussed with him what dress him should wear. him cherished an extraordinary belief in the virtues of “shorts” as a disguise, and had in him's own mind sketched a dress for him that would have made him something between a dean and a dentist. It was with considerable difficulty that I won him over to the assumption of a dress more like a prosperous farmer’s; and we arranged that him should cut him's hair close, and wear a little powder. Lastly, as him had not yet been seen by the laundress or the laundress's niece, him was to keep him out of the laundress or her niece's view until h is change of dress was made.  It would seem a simple matter to decide on these precautions; but in my dazed, not to say distracted, state, decide took so long, that my did not get out to further these precautions until two or three in the afternoon. He was to remain shut up in the chambers while my was gone, and was on no account to open the door.  There being to my's knowledge a respectable lodging-house in Essex Street, the back of which looked into the Temple, and was almost within hail of my's windows, my first of all repaired to a respectable lodging-house in Essex Street, the back of which looked into the Temple, and was almost within hail of my windows, and was so fortunate as to secure the second floor for my's uncle, Mr. Provis. my then went from shop to shop, making such purchases as were necessary to the change in my uncle, Mr. Provis's appearance. This business transacted, my turned my's face, on my's own account, to Little Britain. Mr. Jaggers was at Mr. Jaggers's desk, but, seeing my enter, got up immediately and stood before Mr. Jaggers's fire.  “Now, my,” said Mr. Jaggers, “be careful.”  “my will, Mr. Jaggers,” my returned. For, coming along my had thought well of what my w as going to say.  “Don’t commit yourself,” said Mr. Jaggers, “and don’t commit any one. yourself understand—any one. Don’t tell Mr. Jaggers anything: Mr. Jaggers don’t want to know anything; Mr. Jaggers am not curious.”  Of course yourself saw that Mr. Jaggers knew the man was come.  “yourself merely want, Mr. Jaggers,” said yourself, “to assure yourself that what yourself have been told is true. yourself have no hope of its being untrue, but at least yourself may verify its.”  Mr. Jaggers nodded. “But did yourself say ‘told’ or ‘informed’?” Mr. Jaggers asked yourself, with Mr. Jaggers's head on one side, and not looking at yourself, but looking in a listening way at the floor. “Told would seem to imply verbal communication. You can’t have verbal communication with a man in New South Wales, yourself know.”  “yourself will say, informed, Mr. Jaggers.”  “Good.”  “yourself have been informed by a person named Abel Magwitch, that a person named Abel Magwitch is the benefactor so long unknown to yourself.”  “a person named Abel Magwitch is the man,” said Mr. Jaggers, “in New South Wales.”  “And a person named Abel Magwitch?” said I.  “And a person named Abel Magwitch,” said Mr. Jaggers.  “Mr. Jaggers am not so unreasonable, yourself, as to t hink you at all responsible for my mistakes and wrong conclusions; but my always supposed it was Miss Havisham.”  “As my say, my,” returned you, turning you's eyes upon my coolly, and taking a bite at you's forefinger, “you am not at all responsible for that.”  “And yet it looked so like it, you,” my pleaded with a downcast heart.  “Not a particle of evidence, my,” said you, shaking you's head and gathering up you's skirts. “Take nothing on its looks; take everything on evidence. There’s no better rule.”  “my have no more to say,” said my, with a sigh, after standing silent for a little while. “my have verified my's information, and there’s an end.”  “And Magwitch—in New South Wales—having at last disclosed Magwitch—in New South Wales,” said you, “my will comprehend, my, how rigidly throughout you's communication with my, you have always adhered to the strict line of fact. There has never been the least departure from the strict line of fact. my are quite aware of been?”  “Quite, you.”  “you commun icated to Magwitch—in New South Wales—when Magwitch—in New South Wales first wrote to me—from New South Wales—the caution that Magwitch—in New South Wales must not expect me ever to deviate from the strict line of fact. me also communicated to Magwitch—in New South Wales another caution. Magwitch—in New South Wales appeared to me to have obscurely hinted in Magwitch—in New South Wales's letter at some distant idea Magwitch—in New South Wales had of seeing me in England here. me cautioned Magwitch—in New South Wales that me must hear no more of that; that Magwitch—in New South Wales was not at all likely to obtain a pardon; that Magwitch—in New South Wales was expatriated for the term of Magwitch—in New South Wales's natural life; and that Magwitch—in New South Wales's presenting Magwitch—in New South Wales in this country would be an act of felony, rendering Magwitch—in New South Wales liable to the extreme penalty of the law. me gave Magwitch—in New South Wales the caution that he must not expect me ever to deviate from the strict line of fact,” said me, looking hard at me; “me wrote the caution that he must not expect me ever to deviate from the strict line of fact to New South Wales. Magwitch—in New South Wales guided Magwitch—in New South Wales by the caution that he must not expect me ever to deviate from the strict line of fact, no doubt.”  “No doubt,” said I.  “me have been informed by Wemmick,” pursued me, still looking hard at me, “that Wemmick has received a letter, under date Portsmouth, from a colonist of the name of Purvis, or—”  “Or Provis,” me suggested.  “Or Provis—th ank you, you. Perhaps it _is_ Provis? Perhaps you know it’s Provis?”  “Yes,” said I.  “you know it’s Provis. A letter, under date Portsmouth, from Provis, asking for the particulars of you's address, on behalf of Magwitch. Wemmick sent Provis the particulars of your address, you understand, by return of post. Probably it is through Provis that you have received the explanation of Magwitch?”  “the explanation of Magwitch—in New South Wales came through Provis,” you replied.  “Good day, you,” said you, offering you's hand; “glad to have seen you. In writing by post to MagwitchNew South Wales—or in communicating with Magwitch through Provis, have the goodness to mention that the particulars and vouchers of our long account shall be sent to you, together with the balance; for there is still a balance remaining. Good-day, you!”  We shook hands, and you looked hard at you as long as you could see you. you turned at the door, and you was still looking hard at you, while the two vile casts on the shelf seemed to be try ing to get their eyelids open, and to force out of their's swollen throats, “O, what a man he is!”  Wemmick was out, and though Wemmick had been at Wemmick's desk Wemmick could have done nothing for me. me went straight back to the Temple, where me found he drinking rum and water and smoking negro-head, in safety.  Next day the clothes me had ordered all came home, and he put the clothes I had ordered all on. Whatever he put on, became he less (it dismally seemed to me) than what he had worn before. To me's thinking, there was something in he that made it hopeless to attempt to disguise he. The more me dressed he and the better me dressed he, the more he looked like the slouching fugitive on the marshes. This effect on me's anxious fancy was partly referable, no doubt, to he's old face and manner growing more familiar to me; but me believe too that he dragged one of he's legs as if there were still a weight of iron on one of his legs, and that from head to foot there was Convict in the very grain of he.  The influences of he's  solitary hut-life were upon him besides, and gave him a savage air that no dress could tame; added to these were the influences of him's subsequent branded life among men, and, crowning all, him's consciousness that him was dodging and hiding now. In all him's ways of sitting and standing, and eating and drinking,—of brooding about in a high-shouldered reluctant style,—of taking out him's great horn-handled jackknife and wiping his great horn-handled jackknife on him's legs and cutting him's food,—of lifting light glasses and cups to him's lips, as if light glasses and cups were clumsy pannikins,—of chopping a wedge off him's bread, and soaking up with a wedge the last fragments of gravy round and round him's plate, as if to make the most of an allowance, and then drying him's finger-ends on a wedge, and then swallowing it,—in these ways and a thousand other small nameless instances arising every minute in the day, there was Prisoner, Felon, Bondsman, plain as plain could be.  It had been him's own idea to wear that touch of powder, and I had conceded that touch of powder a fter overcoming the shorts. But I can compare the effect of it, when on, to nothing but the probable effect of rouge upon the dead; so awful was the manner in which everything in him that it was most desirable to repress, started through that thin layer of pretence, and seemed to come blazing out at the crown of him's head. that thin layer of pretence was abandoned as soon as tried, and him wore him's grizzled hair cut short.  Words cannot tell what a sense I had, at the same time, of the dreadful mystery that him was to I. When him fell asleep of an evening, with him's knotted hands clenching the sides of the easy-chair, and him's bald head tattooed with deep wrinkles falling forward on him's breast, I would sit and look at him, wondering what him had done, and loading him with all the crimes in the Calendar, until the impulse was powerful on I to start up and fly from him. Every hour so increased I's abhorrence of him, that I even think I might have yielded to the impulse in the first agonies of being so haunted, notwit hstanding all he had done for me and the risk he ran, but for the knowledge that Herbert must soon come back. Once, me actually did start out of bed in the night, and begin to dress me in me's worst clothes, hurriedly intending to leave he there with everything else me possessed, and enlist for India as a private soldier.  me doubt if a ghost could have been more terrible to me, up in those lonely rooms in the long evenings and long nights, with the wind and the rain always rushing by. A ghost could not have been taken and hanged on me's account, and the consideration that he could be, and the dread that he would be, were no small addition to me's horrors. When he was not asleep, or playing a complicated kind of Patience with a ragged pack of cards of he's own,—a game that me never saw before or since, and in which he recorded he's winnings by sticking he's jackknife into the table,—when he was not engaged in either of these pursuits, he would ask me to read to him,—“Foreign language, he !” While I complied, he, not comprehending a single word, would stand before the fire surveying I with the air of an Exhibitor, and I would see he, between the fingers of the hand with which I shaded I's face, appealing in dumb show to the furniture to take notice of I's proficiency. hehe , was not more wretched than I, pursued by the creature who had made I, and recoiling from the creature who had made me with a stronger repulsion, the more he admired I and the fonder he was of I.  This is written of, I am sensible, as if it had lasted a year. it lasted about five days. Expecting Herbert all the time, I dared not go out, except when I took Provis for an airing after dark. At length, one evening when dinner was over and I had dropped into a slumber quite worn out,—for I's nights had been agitated and I's rest broken by fearful dreams,—I was roused by the welcome footstep on the staircase. Provis, staggered up at t he noise I made, and in an instant I saw his jackknife shining in his's hand.  “Quiet! It’s Herbert!” I said; and Herbert came bursting in, with the airy freshness of six hundred miles of France upon Herbert.  “I, Herbert's , how are I, and again how are I, and again how are I? Herbert seem to have been gone a twelvemonth! Why, so Herbert must have been, for I have grown quite thin and pale! I, Herbert's—Halloa! Herbert beg I's pardon.”  Herbert was stopped in Herbert's running on and in Herbert's shaking hands with I, by seeing Provis. Provis, regarding Herbert with a fixed attention, was slowly putting up his jackknife, and groping in another pocket for something else.  “Herbert, I's dear friend,” said I, shutting the double doors, while Herbert stood staring and wondering, “something very strange has happened. Provis is—a visitor of Provis.”  “It’s all right, I!” said Provis coming forward, with Provis's little clasped black book, and then addressing Provis to Herbert. “Take his little clasped black book in Herbert's right hand. Lord strike yo u dead on the spot, if ever you split in any way sumever! Kiss it!”  “Do so, as he wishes it,” I said to Herbert. So, Herbert, looking at I with a friendly uneasiness and amazement, complied, and he immediately shaking hands with Herbert, said, “Now Herbert’re on Herbert's oath, Herbert know. And never believe he on he, if Pip shan’t make a gentleman on Herbert!”     Chapter XLI.   In vain should I attempt to describe the astonishment and disquiet of Herbert, when Herbert and I and he sat down before the fire, and I recounted the whole of the secret. Enough, that I saw I's own feelings reflected in Herbert's face, and not least among my own feelings, I's repugnance towards HerbertI.  What would alone have set a division between Herbert and us, if there had been no other dividing circumstance, was Herbert's triumph in I's story. Saving Herbert's troublesome sense of having been “low” on one occasion since Herbert's return,—on which point Herbert began to hold forth to Herbert, the moment I's revelation was fini shed,—he had no perception of the possibility of my finding any fault with my's good fortune. His boast that His had made my a gentleman, and that His had come to see my support the character on His's ample resources, was made for my quite as much as for His. And that His boast that he had made me a gentleman, and that he had come to see me support the character on his ample resources was a highly agreeable boast to both of both of us, and that both of us must both be very proud of His boast that he had made me a gentleman, and that he had come to see me support the character on his ample resources, was a conclusion quite established in His's own mind.  “Though, look’ee here, His's comrade,” His said to Herbert, after having discoursed for some time, “His know very well that once since His come back—for half a minute—I’ve been low. His said to His, His knowed as His had been low. But don’t you fret you on that score. His ain’t made His a gentleman, and His ain’t a-going to make my a gentleman, not fur His not to know what’s due to ye both. ye bothPip’s comrade, ye both may count upon His always having a genteel muzzle on. Muzzled His have been since that half a minute when His was betrayed into lowness, muzzled His am at the present time, His uzzled I ever will be.”  Herbert said, “Certainly,” but looked as if there were no specific consolation in said, and remained perplexed and dismayed. We were anxious for the time when Herbert would go to Herbert's lodging and leave We together, but Herbert was evidently jealous of leaving We together, and sat late. It was midnight before I took Herbert round to Essex Street, and saw Herbert safely in at Herbert's own dark door. When his own dark door closed upon Herbert, I experienced the first moment of relief I had known since the night of Herbert's arrival.  Never quite free from an uneasy remembrance of the man on the stairs, I had always looked about I in taking I's out after dark, and in bringing Herbert back; and I looked about I now. Difficult as it is in a large city to avoid the suspicion of being watched, when the mind is conscious of danger in that regard, I could not persuade I that any of the people within sight cared about I's movements. The few who were passing passed on The few who were passing's several ways, and the street was empty w hen I turned back into the Temple. Nobody had come out at the gate with us, nobody went in at the gate with I. As I crossed by the fountain, I saw his lighted back windows looking bright and quiet, and, when I stood for a few moments in the doorway of the building where I lived, before going up the stairs, Garden Court was as still and lifeless as the stairs was when I ascended the stairs.  his received I with open arms, and I had never felt before so blessedly what it is to have a friend. When his had spoken some sound words of sympathy and encouragement, we sat down to consider the question, What was to be done?  The chair that Provis had occupied still remaining where The chair that Provis had occupied had stood,—for Provis had a barrack way with Provis of hanging about one spot, in one unsettled manner, and going through one round of observances with Provis's pipe and Provis's negro-head and Provis's jackknife and Provis's pack of cards, and what not, as if it were all put down for Provis on a slate,—I say Provis's remaining where The chair that Provis had occupied had sto od, Herbert unconsciously took it, but next moment started out of it, pushed it away, and took another. Herbert had no occasion to say after that that Herbert had conceived an aversion for my patron, neither had my occasion to confess my's own. We interchanged that confidence without shaping a syllable.  “What,” said my to Herbert, when Herbert was safe in another chair,—“what is to be done?”  “my,” Herbert replied, holding Herbert's head, “Herbert am too stunned to think.”  “So was my, Herbert, when the blow first fell. Still, something must be done. He is intent upon various new expenses,—horses, and carriages, and lavish appearances of all kinds. He must be stopped somehow.”  “my mean that my can’t accept—”  “How can my?” my interposed, as Herbert paused. “Think of He! Look at He!”  An involuntary shudder passed over We.  “Yet my am afraid the dreadful truth is, Herbert, that He is attached to my, strongly attached to my. Was there ever such a fate!”  “my,” Herbert repeated.   “Then,” said I, “after all, stopping short here, never taking another penny from him, think what I owe him already! Then again: I am heavily in debt,—very heavily for me, who have now no expectations,—and I have been bred to no calling, and I am fit for nothing.”  “Well, well, well!” him remonstrated. “Don’t say fit for nothing.”  “What am I fit for? I know only one thing that I am fit for, and only one thing that I am fit for is, to go for a soldier. And I might have gone, him, but for the prospect of taking counsel with him's friendship and affection.”  Of course I broke down there: and of course him, beyond seizing a warm grip of I's hand, pretended not to know broke.  “Anyhow, him's ,” said him presently, “soldiering won’t do. If I were to renounce this patronage and these favours, him suppose I would do so with some faint hope of one day repaying what I have already had. Not very strong, some faint hope of one day repaying what you have already had, if I went soldiering! Besides, it’s absurd. I would be infinitely better in Clarr iker’s house, small as iker’s house is. I am working up towards a partnership, you know.”  Poor fellow! I little suspected with whose money.  “But there is another question,” said Herbert. “I is an ignorant, determined man, who has long had one fixed idea. More than that, I seems to Herbert (Herbert may misjudge I) to be a man of a desperate and fierce character.”  “I know I is,” I returned. “Let I tell Herbert what evidence I have seen of it.” And I told Herbert what I had not mentioned in I's narrative, of that encounter with the other convict.  “See, then,” said Herbert; “think of this! I comes here at the peril of I's life, for the realisation of one fixed idea. In the moment of realisation, after all I's toil and waiting, you cut the ground from under I's feet, destroy one fixed idea, and make I's gains worthless to I. Do I see nothing that I might do, under the disappointment?”  “I have seen it, Herbert, and dreamed of it, ever since the fatal night of I's arrival. Nothing has been in I's thoughts so  distinctly as his putting his in the way of being taken.”  “Then you may rely upon it,” said Herbert, “that there would be great danger of his's doing it. That is his's power over you as long as his remains in England, and that would be his's reckless course if you forsook his.”  you was so struck by the horror of this idea, which had weighed upon you from the first, and the working out of which would make you regard you, in some sort, as his's murderer, that you could not rest in you's chair, but began pacing to and fro. you said to Herbert, meanwhile, that even if Provis were recognised and taken, in spite of his, you should be wretched as the cause, however innocently. Yes; even though you was so wretched in having his at large and near you, and even though you would far rather have worked at the forge all the days of you's life than you would ever have come to this!  But there was no staving off the question, What was to be done?  “The first and the main thing to be done,” said Herbert, “is to get his  out of England. You will have to go with him, and then him may be induced to go.”  “But get him where You will, could You prevent him's coming back?”  “You, is it not obvious that with Newgate in the next street, there must be far greater hazard in You's breaking You's mind to him and making him reckless, here, than elsewhere? If a pretext to get him away could be made out of Newgate, or out of anything else in him's life, now.”  “There, again!” said You, stopping before Herbert, with You's open hands held out, as if my open hands contained the desperation of the case. “You know nothing of his life. It has almost made You mad to sit here of a night and see him before You, so bound up with You's fortunes and misfortunes, and yet so unknown to You, except as the miserable wretch who terrified You two days in You's childhood!”  Herbert got up, and linked Herbert's arm in You, and we slowly walked to and fro together, studying the carpet.  “You,” said Herbert, stopping, “You feel convinced that You can tak e no further benefits from him; do you?”  “Fully. Surely you would, too, if you were in you's place?”  “And you feel convinced that you must break with him?”  “Herbert, can Herbert ask you?”  “And you have, and are bound to have, that tenderness for the life him has risked on you's account, that you must save him, if possible, from throwing the life he has risked on your account away. Then you must get him out of England before you stir a finger to extricate you. That done, extricate you, in Heaven’s name, and we’ll see it out together, him.”  It was a comfort to shake hands upon it, and walk up and down again, with only that done.  “Now, Herbert,” said you, “with reference to gaining some knowledge of him's history. There is but one way that you know of. you must ask him point blank.”  “Yes. Ask him,” said Herbert, “when we sit at breakfast in the morning.” For him had said, on taking leave of Herbert, that him would come to breakfast with we.  With this project formed, we went to bed. you had the wildest dreams concerning  him, and woke unrefreshed; I woke, too, to recover the fear which I had lost in the night, of him's being found out as a returned transport. Waking, I never lost the fear which I had lost in the night, of his being found out as a returned transport.  him came round at the appointed time, took out him's jackknife, and sat down to him's meal. him was full of plans “for him's gentleman’s coming out strong, and like a gentleman,” and urged I to begin speedily upon the pocket-book which him had left in I's possession. him considered the chambers and him's own lodging as temporary residences, and advised I to look out at once for a “fashionable crib” near Hyde Park, in which him could have “a shake-down.” When him had made an end of him's breakfast, and was wiping his jackknife on him's leg, I said to him, without a word of preface,—  “After him were gone last night, I told I's friend of the struggle that the soldiers found him engaged in on the marshes, when we came up. him remember?”  “Remember!” said him. “him think so!”  “We want to know something about that man—and about him. It is stran ge to know no more about either, and particularly you, than I was able to tell last night. Is not this as good a time as another for our knowing more?”  “Well!” he said, after consideration. “I’re on I's oath, you know, I?”  “Assuredly,” replied I.  “As to anything I say, you know,” I insisted. “The oath applies to all.”  “I understand The oath to do so.”  “And look’ee here! Wotever I done is worked out and paid for,” I insisted again.  “So be it.”  I took out I's black pipe and was going to fill his black pipe with negro-head, when, looking at the tangle of tobacco in I's hand, I seemed to think the tangle of tobacco in his hand might perplex the thread of I's narrative. I put his black pipe back again, stuck his black pipe in a button-hole of I's coat, spread a hand on each knee, and after turning an angry eye on the fire for a few silent moments, looked round at us and said what follows.     Chapter XLII.   “Dear boy and Pip’s's . I am not a-going fur to tell you I's life like a song, or a story-book. But to give it yo u short and handy, u’ll put it at once into a mouthful of English. In jail and out of jail, in jail and out of jail, in jail and out of jail. There, u’ve got it. That’s _u's_ life pretty much, down to such times as u got shipped off, u stood u's friend.  “u’ve been done everything to, pretty well—except hanged. u’ve been locked up as much as a silver tea-kittle. u’ve been carted here and carted there, and put out of this town, and put out of this town, and stuck in the stocks, and whipped and worried and drove. u’ve no more notion where u was born than u have—if so much. u first become aware of u down in Essex, a thieving turnips for u's living. Summun had run away from u—Summun—and Summun’d took the fire with Summun, and left u wery cold.  “u know’d u's name to be Magwitch, chrisen’d Abel. How did u know my name? Much as u know’d the birds’ names in the hedges to be chaffinch, sparrer, thrush. u might have thought it was all lies together, only as the birds’ names in the hedges come out  true, I supposed mine did.  “So fur as I could find, there warn’t a soul that see young Abel Magwitch, with us little on young Abel Magwitch as in young Abel Magwitch, but wot caught fright at young Abel Magwitch, and either drove young Abel Magwitch off, or took young Abel Magwitch up. I was took up, took up, took up, to that extent that I reg’larly grow’d up took up.  “This is the way it was, that when I was a ragged little creetur as much to be pitied as ever I see (not that I looked in the glass, for there warn’t many insides of furnished houses known to I), I got the name of being hardened. ‘I is a terrible hardened one,’ they says to prison wisitors, picking out I. ‘May be said to live in jails, I.’ Then prison wisitors looked at I, and I looked at prison wisitors, and prison wisitors measured I's head, some on ’em,—they had better a measured I's stomach,—and others on ’em giv I tracts what I couldn’t read, and made I speeches what I couldn’t understand. prison wisitors always went on agen I about the Devil. But what the Devil was I to do? I must put something into I's stomach, mustn’t I? —Howsomever, I’m a getting low, and I know what’s due. Dear boy and Pip’s comrade, don’t Dear boy and Pip’s comrade be afeerd of I being low.  “Tramping, begging, thieving, working sometimes when I could,—though that warn’t as often as Dear boy and Pip’s comrade may think, till Dear boy and Pip’s comrade put the question whether Dear boy and Pip’s comrade would ha’ been over-ready to give I work yourselves,—a bit of a poacher, a bit of a labourer, a bit of a wagoner, a bit of a haymaker, a bit of a hawker, a bit of most things that don’t pay and lead to trouble, I got to be a man. A deserting soldier in a Traveller’s Rest, what lay hid up to the chin under a lot of taturs, learnt I to read; and a travelling Giant what signed a travelling Giant what signed his name at a penny a time's name at a penny a time learnt I to write. I warn’t locked up as often now as formerly, but I wore out I's good share of key-metal still.  “At Epsom races, a matter of over twenty years ago, I got acquainted wi’ a man whose skull I’d crack wi’ this poker, like the claw of a lobster, if I’d got this poker on this hob. a man whose skull I’d crack wi’ this poker, like the claw of a lobster, if I’d got it on this hob's right name was Compeyson; and His right name’s  the man, dear boy, what the man see me a pounding in the ditch, according to what the man truly told the man's comrade arter me was gone last night.  “your comrade arter set up fur a gentleman, this Compeyson, and a gentleman, this Compeyson’d been to a public boarding-school and had learning. a gentleman, this Compeyson was a smooth one to talk, and was a dab at the ways of gentlefolks. a gentleman, this Compeyson was good-looking too. It was the night afore the great race, when me found a gentleman, this Compeyson on the heath, in a booth that me know’d on. a gentleman, this Compeyson and some more was a sitting among the tables when me went in, and the landlord (which had a knowledge of me, and was a sporting one) called a gentleman, this Compeyson out, and said, ‘the landlord (which had a knowledge of me, and was a sporting one) think me is a man that might suit you,’—meaning me was.  “a gentleman, this Compeyson, a gentleman, this Compeyson looks at me very noticing, and me look at a gentleman, this Compeyson. a gentleman, this Compeyson has a watch and a chain and a ring and a breast-pin and a handsome suit of clothes.  “‘To judge from appearances, me’re out of luck,’ says a gentleman, this Compeyson to me.  “‘Yes, a gentleman, this Compeyson, and me’ve never been in it much.’ (me had come out of Kingston Jail last on a vagrancy committal. Not but  what it might have been for something else; but it warn’t.)  “‘Luck changes,’ says Compeyson; ‘perhaps yours is going to change.’  “yours says, ‘yours hope it may be so. There’s room.’  “‘What can yours do?’ says Compeyson.  “‘Eat and drink,’ yours says; ‘if Compeyson’ll find the materials.’  “Compeyson laughed, looked at yours again very noticing, giv yours five shillings, and appointed yours for next night. Same place.  “yours went to Compeyson next night, Same place, and Compeyson took yours on to be Compeyson's man and pardner. And what was Compeyson's business in which we was to go pardners? Compeyson’s business in which we was to go pardners was the swindling, handwriting forging, stolen bank-note passing, and such-like. All sorts of traps as Compeyson could set with Compeyson's head, and keep Compeyson's own legs out of and get the profits from and let another man in for, was Compeyson’s business in which we was to go pardners. Compeyson’d no more heart than a iron file, Compeyson was as cold as death, and Compeyson had the head of the Devil afore mentioned.  “There was another in with Compeyson, as was called Arthur,— not as being so chrisen’d, but as a surname. He was in a Decline, and was a shadow to look at. He and Compeyson had been in a bad thing with a rich lady some years afore, and Him and Compeyson’d made a pot of money by a bad thing with a rich lady; but Compeyson betted and gamed, and Compeyson’d have run through the king’s taxes. So, He was a dying, and a dying poor and with the horrors on He, and Compeyson's wife (which Compeyson kicked mostly) was a having pity on Compeyson when Compeyson’s wife (which Compeyson kicked mostly) could, and Compeyson was a having pity on nothing and nobody.  “I might a took warning by He, but I didn’t; and I won’t pretend I was partick’ler—for where ’ud be the good on it, I? So I begun wi’ Compeyson, and a poor tool I was in Compeyson's hands. He lived at the top of Compeyson's house (over nigh Brentford it was), and Compeyson kept a careful account agen He for board and lodging, in case Compeyson should ever get better to work it out. But He soon settled the account. The second or third time as ever I see He, He come a teari ng down into Compeyson’s parlour late at night, in only a flannel gown, with ng's hair all in a sweat, and ng says to Compeyson’s's wife, ‘Compeyson’s wife, she really is upstairs alonger ng, now, and ng can’t get rid of she. she’s all in white,’ ng says, ‘wi’ white flowers in she's hair, and she’s awful mad, and she’s got a shroud hanging over she's arm, and she says she’ll put a shroud on ng at five in the morning.’  “Says Compeyson’s: ‘Why, ng, don’t ng know she’s got a living body? And how should she be up there, without coming through the door, or in at the window, and up the stairs?’  “‘I don’t know how she’s there,’ says I, shivering dreadful with the horrors, ‘but she’s standing in the corner at the foot of the bed, awful mad. And over where she's heart’s broke—_you_ broke it!—there’s drops of blood.’  “Compeyson’s spoke hardy, but Compeyson’s was always a coward. ‘Go up alonger ng,’ Compeyson’s says to Compeyson’s wife, ‘and Magwitch, lend Compeyson’s wife a hand, will Magwitch?’ But Compeyson’s never come nigh Compeyson’s.  “Com peyson’s wife and me took peyson’s up to bed agen, and peyson’s raved most dreadful. ‘Why look at her!’ peyson’s cries out. ‘her’s a shaking the shroud at peyson’s! Don’t you see her? Look at her's eyes! Ain’t it awful to see her so mad?’ Next peyson’s cries, ‘her’ll put the shroud on peyson’s, and then peyson’s’m done for! Take the shroud away from her, take the shroud away!’ And then peyson’s catched hold of peyson’s wife and me, and kep on a talking to her, and answering of her, till me half believed me see her me.  “peyson’s wife, being used to peyson’s, giv peyson’s some liquor to get the horrors off, and by and by peyson’s quieted. ‘O, her’s gone! Has her's keeper been for her?’ peyson’s says. ‘Yes,’ says Compeyson’s's . ‘Did peyson’s wife tell her keeper to lock her and bar her in?’ ‘Yes.’ ‘And to take the shroud away from her?’ ‘Yes, yes, all right.’ ‘peyson’s wife’re a good creetur,’ peyson’s says, ‘don’t leave peyson’s, whatever peyson’s wife do, and thank peyson’s wife!’  “peyson’s rested pretty quiet till it might want a few minutes of five, and then peyson’s starts up with a scream, and screams out, ‘Here her is! her’s got the shroud again. her ’s unfolding it. She’s coming out of the corner. She’s coming to the bed. Hold me, both on both—one of each side—don’t let She touch me with it. Hah! She missed me that time. Don’t let She throw it over me's shoulders. Don’t let She lift me up to get it round me. She’s lifting me up. Keep me down!’ Then me lifted me up hard, and was dead.  “Compeyson took it easy as a good riddance for both sides. Compeyson and me was soon busy, and first Compeyson swore me (being ever artful) on me's own book,—this here little black book, dear boy, what me swore dear boy's comrade on.  “Not to go into the things that Compeyson planned, and me done—which ’ud take a week—me simply say to dear boy, dear boyyour comrade, that Compeyson got me into such nets as made me Compeyson's black slave. me was always in debt to Compeyson, always under Compeyson's thumb, always a working, always a getting into danger. Compeyson was younger than me, but Compeyson’d got craft, and Compeyson’d got learning, and Compeyson overmatched me five hundred times told and no mercy. me's Missis as me  had the hard time wi’—Stop though! I ain’t brought _her_ in—”  I looked about I in a confused way, as if I had lost I's place in the book of I's remembrance; and I turned I's face to the fire, and spread I's hands broader on I's knees, and lifted his hands off and put his hands on again.  “There ain’t no need to go into it,” I said, looking round once more. “The time wi’ Compeyson was a’most as hard a time as ever I had; that said, all’s said. Did I tell you as I was tried, alone, for misdemeanor, while with Compeyson?”  you answered, No.  “Well!” I said, “I _was_, and got convicted. As to took up on suspicion, took was twice or three times in the four or five year that it lasted; but evidence was wanting. At last, I and Compeyson was both committed for felony,—on a charge of putting stolen notes in circulation,—and there was other charges behind. Compeyson says to I, ‘Separate defences, no communication,’ and that was all. And I was so miserable poor, that I sold all the clothes I had,  except what hung on my back, afore my could get Jaggers.  “When we was put in the dock, my noticed first of all what a gentleman Compeyson looked, wi’ a gentleman Compeyson's curly hair and a gentleman Compeyson's black clothes and a gentleman Compeyson's white pocket-handkercher, and what a common sort of a wretch my looked. When the prosecution opened and the evidence was put short, aforehand, my noticed how heavy the evidence bore on my, and how light on a gentleman Compeyson. When the evidence was giv in the box, my noticed how it was always my that had come for’ard, and could be swore to, how it was always my that the money had been paid to, how it was always my that had seemed to work the thing and get the profit. But when the defence come on, then my see the plan plainer; for, says the counsellor for a gentleman Compeyson, ‘the counsellor for Compeyson's lord and gentlemen, here My lord and gentlemen has afore My lord and gentlemen, side by side, two persons as My lord and gentlemen's eyes can separate wide; one, the younger, well brought up, who will be spoke to as such; one, the elder, ill brought up, who will be spoke to as such; one, the younger, seldom if  ever seen in these here transactions, and only suspected; t’other, the elder, always seen in ’em and always wi’ t’other, the elder, always seen in ’em and always wi’ his guilt brought home's guilt brought home. Can you doubt, if there is but one in it, which is the one, and, if there is two in it, which is much the worst one?’ And such-like. And when it come to character, warn’t it Compeyson as had been to the school, and warn’t it Compeyson as had been to the school's schoolfellows as was in this position and in that, and warn’t it Compeyson as had been to the schoolCompeyson as had been to the school's ? And warn’t it me as had been tried afore, and as had been know’d up hill and down dale in Bridewells and Lock-Ups! And when it come to speech-making, warn’t it Compeyson as could speak to ’em wi’ Compeyson as had been to the school's face dropping every now and then into Compeyson as had been to the school's white pocket-handkercher,—ah! and wi’ verses in Compeyson as had been to the school's speech, too,—and warn’t it me as could only say, ‘Gentlemen, this man at me as could only say, ‘Gentlemen, this man at my side is a most precious rascal's side is a most precious rascal’? And when the verdict come, warn’t it Compeyson as had been to the school rcy on account of good character and bad company, and giving up all the information he could agen me, and warn’t it me as got never a word but Guilty? And when me says to he, ‘Once out of this court, me’ll smash that face of he!’ ain’t it he as prays the Judge to be protected, and gets two turnkeys stood betwixt us? And when us’re sentenced, ain’t it he as gets seven year, and me fourteen, and ain’t it him as the Judge is sorry for, because he might a done so well, and ain’t it me as the Judge perceives to be a old offender of wiolent passion, likely to come to worse?”  he had worked he into a state of great excitement, but he checked it, took two or three short breaths, swallowed as often, and stretching out he's hand towards me said, in a reassuring manner, “he ain’t a-going to be low, me!”  he had so heated he that he took out he's handkerchief and wiped he's face and head and neck and hands, before he could go on.  [Illustration]  “me had said to he n that I’d smash that face of his, and I swore Lord smash mine! to do smash. We was in the same prison-ship, but I couldn’t get at his for long, though I tried. At last I come behind his and hit his on the cheek to turn his round and get a smashing one at his, when I was seen and seized. The black-hole of the same prison-ship warn’t a strong one, to a judge of black-holes that could swim and dive. I escaped to the shore, and I was a hiding among the graves there, envying them as was in ’em and all over, when I first see I's boy!”  my boy regarded I with a look of affection that made my boy almost abhorrent to I again, though I had felt great pity for my boy.  “By my boy, I was giv to understand as Compeyson was out on them marshes too. Upon I's soul, I half believe Compeyson escaped in Compeyson's terror, to get quit of I, not knowing it was me as had got ashore. I hunted Compeyson down. I smashed that face of his. ‘And now,’ says I ‘as the worst thing I can do, caring nothing for I, I’ll drag my boy back.’ And I’d have swum off, my boy ng him by the hair, if it had come to that, and I’d a got him aboard without the soldiers.  “Of course him’d much the best of it to the last,—his character was so good. him had escaped when him was made half wild by I and I's murderous intentions; and him's punishment was light. I was put in irons, brought to trial again, and sent for life. I didn’t stop for life, dear boy and Pip’s comrade, being here.”  I wiped I again, as I had done before, and then slowly took I's tangle of tobacco from I's pocket, and plucked I's pipe from I's button-hole, and slowly filled his pipe, and began to smoke.  “Is him dead?” I asked, after a silence.  “Is who dead, I?”  “Compeyson.”  “him hopes _I_ am, if him’s alive, I may be sure,” with a fierce look. “I never heerd no more of him.”  Herbert had been writing with Herbert's pencil in the cover of a book. Herbert softly pushed a book over to I, as I stood smoking with I's eyes on the fire, and I read in a book:—  “Young Havisham’s name was Arthur. Compeyson  is the man who professed to be Miss Havisham’s lover.”  I shut the book and nodded slightly to Herbert, and put the book by; but we neither of we said anything, and we looked at Provis as Provis stood smoking by the fire.     Chapter XLIII.   Why should I pause to ask how much of I's shrinking from Provis might be traced to Estella? Why should I loiter on I's road, to compare the state of mind in which I had tried to rid I of the stain of the prison before meeting Estella at the coach-office, with the state of mind in which I now reflected on the abyss between EstellaEstella's , and ProvisI ? my road would be none the smoother for it, the end would be none the better for it, Provis would not be helped, nor I extenuated.  A new fear had been engendered in I's mind by Provis's narrative; or rather, his narrative had given form and purpose to the fear that was already there. If Compeyson were alive and should discover Compeyson's return, I could hardly doubt the  consequence. That Compeyson stood in mortal fear of him, neither of the two could know much better than I; and that any such man as him had been described to be would hesitate to release any such man as that man had been described to be for good from a dreaded enemy by the safe means of becoming an informer was scarcely to be imagined.  Never had I breathed, and never would I breathe—or so I resolved—a word of Estella to Provis. But, I said to Herbert that, before I could go abroad, I must see both Estella and Miss Havisham. This was when we were left alone on the night of the day when Provis told we Provis's story. I resolved to go out to Richmond next day, and I went.  On I's presenting I at Mrs. Brandley’s, Estella's maid was called to tell that Estella had gone into the country. Where? To Satis House, as usual. Not as usual, I said, for Estella had never yet gone there without I; when was Estella coming back? There was an air of reservation in the answer which increased I's perplexity, and the answer was, that Estella’s maid believe d she was only coming back at all for a little while. I could make nothing of this, except that it was meant that I should make nothing of this, and I went home again in complete discomfiture.  Another night consultation with Herbert after Provis was gone home (I always took Provis home, and always looked well about I), led us to the conclusion that nothing should be said about going abroad until I came back from Miss Havisham’s. In the mean time, us were to consider separately what it would be best to say; whether us should devise any pretence of being afraid that Provis was under suspicious observation; or whether I, should propose an expedition. us knew that I had but to propose anything, and Provis would consent. us agreed that Provis's remaining many days in Provis's present hazard was not to be thought of.  Next day I had the meanness to feign that I was under a binding promise to go down to Joe; but I was capable of almost any meanness towards Joe or Joe's  name. Provis was to be strictly careful while I was gone, and Herbert was to take the charge of Provis that I had taken. I was to be absent only one night, and, on I's return, the gratification of Provis's impatience for I's starting as a gentleman on a greater scale was to be begun. It occurred to I then, and as I afterwards found to Herbert also, that Provis might be best got away across the water, on that pretence,—as, to make purchases, or the like.  Having thus cleared the way for I's expedition to Miss Havisham’s, I set off by the early morning coach before it was yet light, and was out on the open country road when the day came creeping on, halting and whimpering and shivering, and wrapped in patches of cloud and rags of mist, like a beggar. When we drove up to the Blue Boar after a drizzly ride, whom should I see come out under the gateway, toothpick in hand, to look at the early morning coach, but Bentley Drummle!  As Bentley Drummle pretended not to see I, I pretended not to see Bentley Drummle. It was a very lame pretence on  both sides; the lamer, because we both went into the coffee-room, where the lamer had just finished the lamer's breakfast, and where I ordered I. It was poisonous to I to see the lamer in the town, for I very well knew why the lamer had come there.  Pretending to read a smeary newspaper long out of date, which had nothing half so legible in its local news, as the foreign matter of coffee, pickles, fish sauces, gravy, melted butter, and wine with which it was sprinkled all over, as if it had taken the measles in a highly irregular form, I sat at I's table while the lamer stood before the fire. By degrees it became an enormous injury to I that the lamer stood before the fire. And I got up, determined to have I's share of it. I had to put I's hand behind the lamer's legs for the poker when I went up to the fireplace to stir the fire, but still pretended not to know the lamer.  “Is this a cut?” said the lamer.  “Oh!” said I, poker in hand; “it’s the lamer, is it? How do the lamer do? I was wondering who it was, who kept the fire off.”  With that, I po ked tremendously, and having done so, planted myself side by side with Mr. Drummle, myself's shoulders squared and myself's back to the fire.  “myself have just come down?” said Mr. Drummle, edging myself a little away with Mr. Drummle's shoulder.  “Yes,” said myself, edging _Mr. Drummle_ a little away with _myself's_ shoulder.  “Beastly place,” said Mr. Drummle. “myself's part of the country, Mr. Drummle think?”  “Yes,” myself assented. “myself am told Your part of the country’s very like Mr. Drummle's Shropshire.”  “Not in the least like your Shropshire,” said Mr. Drummle.  Here Mr. Drummle looked at Mr. Drummle's boots and myself looked at myself, and then Mr. Drummle looked at his boots, and myself looked at Mr. Drummle.  “Have Mr. Drummle been here long?” myself asked, determined not to yield an inch of the fire.  “Long enough to be tired of it,” returned Mr. Drummle, pretending to yawn, but equally determined.  “Do Mr. Drummle stay here long?”  Mr. DrummleCan’t say,” answered Mr. Drummle. “Do myself?”  “Can’t say,” said myself  myself felt here, through a tingling in myself's blood, that if his shoulder had claimed another hair’s breadth of room, myself should have jerked Mr. Drummle in to the window; equally, that if my own shoulder had urged a similar claim, Mr. Drummle would have jerked my into the nearest box. Mr. Drummle whistled a little. So did I.  “Large tract of marshes about here, Mr. Drummle believe?” said Mr. Drummle.  “Yes. What of Large tract of marshes about here?” said I. Mr. Drummle Mr. Drummle looked at my, and then at my's boots, and then said, “Oh!” and laughed.  “Are Mr. Drummle amused, Mr. Drummle?”  “No,” said Mr. Drummle, “not particularly. Mr. Drummle am going out for a ride in the saddle. Mr. Drummle mean to explore those marshes for amusement. Out-of-the-way villages there, they tell Mr. Drummle. Curious little public-houses—and smithies—and that. Waiter!”  “Yes, Mr. Drummle.”  “Is that horse of Mr. Drummle ready?”  “Brought round to the door, Mr. Drummle.”  “Mr. Drummle say. Look here, Mr. Drummle. The lady won’t ride to-day; the weather won’t do.”  “Very good, Mr. Drummle.”  “And Mr. Drummle don’t dine, because Mr. Drummle’m going to dine at The lady's.”  “Very good, Mr. Drummle.”  Then, Mr. Drummle glanced at my, with an insolent triumph on Mr. Drummle's great-jowled face that cut my to the heart, dull as Mr. Drummle was, and so exasperated  me, that me felt inclined to take him in me's arms (as the robber in the story-book is said to have taken the old lady) and seat him on the fire.  One thing was manifest to both of us, and One thing was, that until relief came, neither of us could relinquish the fire. There both of us stood, well squared up before the fire, shoulder to shoulder and foot to foot, with both of us's hands behind both of us, not budging an inch. The horse was visible outside in the drizzle at the door, me's breakfast was put on the table, Drummle’s was cleared away, the waiter invited me to begin, me nodded, both of us stood both of us's ground.  “Have me been to the Grove since?” said Drummle’s.  “No,” said me, “me had quite enough of the Finches the last time me was there.”  “Was that when both of us had a difference of opinion?”  “Yes,” me replied, very shortly.  “Come, come! They let me off easily enough,” sneered Drummle’s. “me shouldn’t have lost me's temper.”  “Drummle’s,” said me, “Drummle’s are not competent to give advice on that subject. When me lose me's temper (not t hat I admit having done so on that occasion), I don’t throw glasses.”  “I do,” said Drummle.  After glancing at Drummle once or twice, in an increased state of smouldering ferocity, I said,—  “Drummle, I did not seek this conversation, and I don’t think this conversation an agreeable one.”  “Drummle am sure this conversation’s not,” said Drummle, superciliously over Drummle's shoulder; “Drummle don’t think anything about it.”  “And therefore,” I went on, “with Drummle's leave, I will suggest that we hold no kind of communication in future.”  “Quite Drummle's opinion,” said Drummle, “and what Drummle should have suggested Drummle, or done—more likely—without suggesting. But don’t lose I's temper. Haven’t I lost enough without lose?”  “What do Drummle mean, Drummle?”  “Waiter!” said Drummle, by way of answering I.  Waiter reappeared.  “Look here, I. I quite understand that the young lady don’t ride to-day, and that I dine at the young lady's?”  “Quite so, I!”  When Waiter had felt I's fast-cooling teapot with the palm of Waiter's hand, and had looked  imploringly at me, and had gone out, Drummle, careful not to move the shoulder next me, took a cigar from Drummle's pocket and bit the end off, but showed no sign of stirring. Choking and boiling as me was, me felt that we could not go a word further, without introducing Estella’s name, which me could not endure to hear Drummle utter; and therefore me looked stonily at the opposite wall, as if there were no one present, and forced me to silence. How long we might have remained in this ridiculous position it is impossible to say, but for the incursion of three thriving farmers—laid on by the waiter, me think—who came into the coffee-room unbuttoning their great-coats and rubbing their's hands, and before whom, as their charged at the fire, we were obliged to give way.  me saw him through the window, seizing him's horse’s mane, and mounting in him's blundering brutal manner, and sidling and backing away. me thought him was gone, when him came back, calling for a light for the cigar in him's mouth, which him had  forgotten. A man in a dust-coloured dress appeared with what was wanted,—I could not have said from where: whether from the inn yard, or the street, or where not,—and as Drummle leaned down from the saddle and lighted Drummle's cigar and laughed, with a jerk of Drummle's head towards the coffee-room windows, the slouching shoulders and ragged hair of A man in a dust-coloured dress reminded me of Orlick.  Too heavily out of sorts to care much at the time whether it were Drummle or no, or after all to touch the breakfast, me washed the weather and the journey from me's face and hands, and went out to the memorable old house that it would have been so much the better for me never to have entered, never to have seen.     Chapter XLIV.   In the room where the dressing-table stood, and where the wax-candles burnt on the wall, me found Miss Havisham and Estella; Miss Havisham seated on a settee near the fire, and Estella on a cushion at Miss Havisham's feet. Estella was knitting, and Miss Havisham was looking on. They b oth raised their eyes as I went in, and their saw an alteration in I. I derived an alteration in me, from the look their interchanged.  “And what wind,” said Miss Havisham, “blows I here, I?”  Though Miss Havisham looked steadily at I, I saw that Miss Havisham was rather confused. Estella, pausing a moment in Estella's knitting with Estella's eyes upon I, and then going on, I fancied that I read in the action of Estella's fingers, as plainly as if Estella had told I in the dumb alphabet, that Estella perceived I had discovered I's real benefactor.  “Miss Havisham,” said I, “I went to Richmond yesterday, to speak to Estella; and finding that some wind had blown _Estella's_ here, I followed.”  Miss Havisham motioning to I for the third or fourth time to sit down, I took the chair by the dressing-table, which I had often seen Miss Havisham's occupy. With all that ruin at I's feet and about I, the chair by the dressing-table, which I had often seen her occupy seemed a natural place for I, that day.  “What I had to say to Estella, Miss Havisham, I will say before Miss Havisham, presently—in a few moments. It will not surprise Miss Havisham, It  will not displease you. I am as unhappy as you can ever have meant I to be.”  you continued to look steadily at I. I could see in the action of Estella’s fingers as Estella’s fingers worked that Estella’s attended to what I said; but Estella’s did not look up.  “I have found out who I's patron is. found is not a fortunate discovery, and is not likely ever to enrich I in reputation, station, fortune, anything. There are reasons why I must say no more of that. It is not I's secret, but another’s.”  As I was silent for a while, looking at Estella’s and considering how to go on, you repeated, “It is not I's secret, but another’s. Well?”  “When you first caused I to be brought here, you, when I belonged to the village over yonder, that I wish I had never left, I suppose I did really come here, as any other chance boy might have come,—as a kind of servant, to gratify a want or a whim, and to be paid for it?”  “Ay, I,” replied you, steadily nodding you's head; “I did.”  “And t hat Mr. Jaggers—”  “Mr. Jaggers,” said Miss Havisham, taking me up in a firm tone, “had nothing to do with it, and knew nothing of it. Mr. Jaggers's being Miss Havisham's lawyer, and Mr. Jaggers's being the lawyer of me's patron is a coincidence. Mr. Jaggers holds the same relation towards numbers of people, and it might easily arise. Be that as it may, it did arise, and was not brought about by any one.”  Any one might have seen in Miss Havisham's haggard face that there was no suppression or evasion so far.  “But when me fell into the mistake me have so long remained in, at least Miss Havisham led me on?” said I.  “Yes,” Miss Havisham returned, again nodding steadily, “Miss Havisham let me go on.”  “Was let kind?”  “Who am Miss Havisham,” cried Miss Havisham, striking Miss Havisham's stick upon the floor and flashing into wrath so suddenly that Estella glanced up at Miss Havisham in surprise,—“who am Miss Havisham, for God’s sake, that Miss Havisham should be kind?”  It was a weak complaint to have made, and me had not meant to make It. me told Miss Havisham so, as Miss Havisham sat brooding after this outburst.  “Well, well, well!” Miss Havisham said. “Wh at else?”  “I was liberally paid for I's old attendance here,” I said, to soothe her, “in being apprenticed, and I have asked these questions only for I's own information. What follows has another (and I hope more disinterested) purpose. In humouring I's mistake, her, her punished—practised on—perhaps her will supply whatever term expresses her's intention, without offence—her's self-seeking relations?”  “her did. Why, your self-seeking relations would have it so! So would her. What has been I's history, that I should be at the pains of entreating either your self-seeking relations or her not to have it so! her made her's own snares. _I_ never made your own snares.”  Waiting until her was quiet again,—for this, too, flashed out of her in a wild and sudden way,—I went on.  “I have been thrown among one family of her's relations, her, and have been constantly among one family of your relations since I went to London. I know one family of your relations to have been as honestly under I's delusion as II. And I should be false and base if I did not tell her, whether it is accept able to you or no, and whether you are inclined to give credence to it or no, that you deeply wrong both Mr. Matthew Pocket and Mr. Matthew Pocket's son Herbert, if you suppose both Mr. Matthew Pocket and his son Herbert to be otherwise than generous, upright, open, and incapable of anything designing or mean.”  “both Mr. Matthew Pocket and his son Herbert are you's friends,” said Miss Havisham.  “both Mr. Matthew Pocket and his son Herbert made both Mr. Matthew Pocket and his son Herbert you's friends,” said you, “when both Mr. Matthew Pocket and his son Herbert supposed you to have superseded both Mr. Matthew Pocket and his son Herbert; and when Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camilla were not you's friends, you think.”  This contrasting of Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camilla with the rest seemed, you was glad to see, to do Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camilla good with Miss Havisham. Miss Havisham looked at you keenly for a little while, and then said quietly,—  “What do you want for Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camilla?”  “Only,” said you, “that Miss Havisham would not confound Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camilla with the rest. Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camilla may be of the same blood, but, believe you, Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camilla are not of the same nature.”  Still looking at you keenly, Miss Havisham repeated,—  “What do you want for Sarah Pocket, Miss Georgiana, and Mistress Camilla?”  “you am not so cunning, Miss Havisham see,” you said, in answer, conscious that you reddened a little, “ as that I could hide from you, even if I desired, that I do want something. you, if you would spare the money to do I's friend Herbert a lasting service in life, but which from the nature of the case must be done without my friend Herbert's knowledge, I could show you how.”  “Why must a lasting service in life, but which from the nature of the case must be done without his knowledge be done without my friend Herbert's knowledge?” you asked, settling you's hands upon you's stick, that you might regard I the more attentively.  “Because,” said I, “I began a lasting service in life, but which from the nature of the case must be done without his knowledge I, more than two years ago, without my friend Herbert's knowledge, and I don’t want to be betrayed. Why I fail in I's ability to finish a lasting service in life, but which from the nature of the case must be done without his knowledge, I cannot explain. It is a part of the secret which is another person’s and not I.”  you gradually withdrew you's eyes from I, and turned her eyes on the fire. After watching the fire for what appeared in the silence and by the light of the slowly wasting candles to be a long time, you was roused by the collapse of some of the red coals, and looked towards I again—at first, vacantly—then, with a gradually concentrating attention . All this time Estella knitted on. When Miss Havisham had fixed Miss Havisham's attention on me, Miss Havisham said, speaking as if there had been no lapse in our dialogue,—  “What else?”  “Estella,” said me, turning to Estella now, and trying to command me's trembling voice, “Estella know me love Estella. Estella know that me have loved Estella long and dearly.”  Estella raised Estella's eyes to me's face, on being thus addressed, and Estella's fingers plied her fingers's work, and Estella looked at me with an unmoved countenance. me saw that Miss Havisham glanced from me to Estella, and from Estella to me.  “me should have said this sooner, but for me's long mistake. my long mistake induced me to hope that Miss Havisham meant us for one another. While me thought Estella could not help Estella, as it were, me refrained from saying this. But me must say this now.”  Preserving an unmoved countenance, and with her fingers still going, Estella shook Estella's head.  “me know,” said me, in answer to that action,—“I know. me have no hope that me shall ever call Estella mine, Estella. me am ignorant what may becom e of me very soon, how poor me may be, or where me may go. Still, me love you. me have loved you ever since me first saw you in this house.”  Looking at me perfectly unmoved and with you's fingers busy, you shook you's head again.  “It would have been cruel in you, horribly cruel, to practise on the susceptibility of a poor boy, and to torture me through all these years with a vain hope and an idle pursuit, if you had reflected on the gravity of what you did. But me think you did not. me think that, in the endurance of you's own trial, you forgot me, you.”  me saw you put you's hand to you's heart and hold her hand there, as you sat looking by turns at you and at me.  “It seems,” said you, very calmly, “that there are sentiments, fancies,—I don’t know how to call them,—which you am not able to comprehend. When you say you love you, you know what you mean, as a form of words; but nothing more. you address nothing in you's breast, you touch nothing there. you don’t care for what you say  at all. I have tried to warn you of this; now, have I not?”  you said in a miserable manner, “Yes.”  “Yes. But you would not be warned, for you thought I did not mean this. Now, did you not think so?”  “you thought and hoped I could not mean this. You, so young, untried, and beautiful, I! Surely it is not in Nature.”  “it is in _I's_ nature,” I returned. And then I added, with a stress upon the words, “it is in the nature formed within I. I make a great difference between you and all other people when I say so much. I can do no more.”  “Is it not true,” said you, “that Bentley Drummle is in town here, and pursuing I?”  “It is quite true,” I replied, referring to Bentley Drummle with the indifference of utter contempt.  “That I encourage Bentley Drummle, and ride out with Bentley Drummle, and that Bentley Drummle dines with I this very day?”  I seemed a little surprised that you should know it, but again replied, “Quite true.”  “I cannot love Bentley Drummle, I!”  I's fingers stopped for the first time, as I retorted rather an grily, “What have I told you? Do you still think, in spite of it, that I do not mean what I say?”  “you would never marry him, you?”  you looked towards Miss Havisham, and considered for a moment with you's work in you's hands. Then you said, “Why not tell I the truth? you am going to be married to him.”  I dropped I's face into I's hands, but was able to control I better than I could have expected, considering what agony it gave I to hear you say those words. When I raised my face again, there was such a ghastly look upon Miss Havisham's, that such a ghastly look upon Miss Havisham’s impressed I, even in I's passionate hurry and grief.  “you, dearest Estella, do not let Miss Havisham lead you into this fatal step. Put I aside for ever,—you have done so, I well know,—but bestow you on some worthier person than him. Miss Havisham gives you to him, as the greatest slight and injury that could be done to the many far better men who admire you, and to the few who truly love you. Among the few who truly love you there may be o ne who loves you even as dearly, though he has not loved you as long, as I. Take he, and I. can bear it better, for you's sake!”  I.'s earnestness awoke a wonder in you that seemed as if it would have been touched with compassion, if you could have rendered I. at all intelligible to you's own mind.  “you am going,” you said again, in a gentler voice, “to be married to he. The preparations for you's marriage are making, and you shall be married soon. Why do I. injuriously introduce the name of you's mother by adoption? It is you's own act.”  “you's own act, you, to fling you away upon a brute?”  “On whom should you fling you away?” you retorted, with a smile. “Should you fling you away upon hehe? There! It is done. you shall do well enough, and so will he. As to leading you into what I. call this fatal step, Miss Havisham would have had you wait, and not marry yet; but you am tired of the life you have l ed, which has very few charms for me, and me am willing enough to change it. Say no more. We shall never understand We.”  “Such a mean brute, such a stupid brute!” I urged, in despair.  “Don’t be afraid of my being a blessing to me,” said my; “my shall not be that. Come! Here is my's hand. Do We part on this, you visionary boy—or man?”  “my!” I answered, as I's bitter tears fell fast on my hand, do what I would to restrain my bitter tears; “even if I remained in England and could hold I's head up with the rest, how could I see my?”  “Nonsense,” my returned,—“nonsense. This will pass in no time.”  “Never, my!”  “my will get I out of my's thoughts in a week.”  “Out of your thoughts! I are part of my's existence, part of my. I have been in every line my have ever read since my first came here, II . I have been in every prospect my have ever seen since,—on the river, on the sails of the ships, on the ma rshes, in the clouds, in the light, in the darkness, in the wind, in the woods, in the sea, in the streets. You have been the embodiment of every graceful fancy that my mind has ever become acquainted with. The stones of which the strongest London buildings are made are not more real, or more impossible to be displaced by You's hands, than You's presence and influence have been to my, there and everywhere, and will be. You, to the last hour of my's life, You cannot choose but remain part of my's character, part of the little good in my, part of the evil. But, in this separation, my associate You only with the good; and my will faithfully hold You to that always, for You must have done my far more good than harm, let my feel now what sharp distress my may. O God bless You, O God forgive You!”  In what ecstasy of unhappiness my got these broken words out of my, my don’t know. The rhapsody welled up within my, like blood from an inward wound, and gushed out. my held You's hand to my's lips some lin gering moments, and so I left her. But ever afterwards, I remembered,—and soon afterwards with stronger reason,—that while her looked at I merely with incredulous wonder, the spectral figure of Miss Havisham, Miss Havisham's hand still covering Miss Havisham's heart, seemed all resolved into a ghastly stare of pity and remorse.  All done, all gone! So much was done and gone, that when I went out at the gate, the light of the day seemed of a darker colour than when I went in. For a while, I hid I among some lanes and by-paths, and then struck off to walk all the way to London. For, I had by that time come to I so far as to consider that I could not go back to the inn and see Drummle there; that I could not bear to sit upon the coach and be spoken to; that I could do nothing half so good for I as tire I out.  It was past midnight when I crossed London Bridge. Pursuing the narrow intricacies of the streets which at that time tended westward near the Middlesex shore of the river, I est access to the Temple was close by the river-side, through Whitefriars. I was not expected till to-morrow; but I had I's keys, and, if Herbert were gone to bed, could get to bed I without disturbing Herbert.  As it seldom happened that I came in at that Whitefriars gate after the Temple was closed, and as I was very muddy and weary, I did not take it ill that the night-porter examined I with much attention as the night-porter held that Whitefriars gate a little way open for I to pass in. To help the night-porter's memory I mentioned I's name.  “I was not quite sure, I, but I thought so. Here’s a note, I. The messenger that brought a note, said would I be so good as read a note by The messenger that brought it's lantern?”  [Illustration]  Much surprised by the request, I took a note. a note was directed to Philip Pip, Esquire, and on the top of the superscription were the words, “PLEASE READ a note, HERE.” I opened a note, The messenger that brought it holding up The messenger that brought it's light, and read inside, in Wemmick’s writing,—  “DON’T GO HOME.”     Chapter XLV.   Turning from that Whitefriars gate  as soon as I had read the warning, I made the best of I's way to Fleet Street, and there got a late hackney chariot and drove to the Hummums in Covent Garden. In those times a bed was always to be got there at any hour of the night, and the chamberlain, letting I in at the chamberlain's ready wicket, lighted the candle next in order on the chamberlain's shelf, and showed I straight into the bedroom next in order on the chamberlain's list. the bedroom next in order on his list was a sort of vault on the ground floor at the back, with a despotic monster of a four-post bedstead in the bedroom next in order on his list, straddling over the whole place, putting one of a despotic monster of a four-post bedstead's arbitrary legs into the fireplace and another into the doorway, and squeezing the wretched little washing-stand in quite a Divinely Righteous manner.  As I had asked for a night-light, the chamberlain had brought I in, before the chamberlain left I, the good old constitutional rushlight of those virtuous days—an object like the ghost of a walking-cane, which instantly broke its back if its were touched, which nothing could ever be lighted at,  and which was placed in solitary confinement at the bottom of a high tin tower, perforated with round holes that made a staringly wide-awake pattern on the walls. When I had got into bed, and lay there footsore, weary, and wretched, I found that I could no more close I's own eyes than I could close the eyes of this foolish Argus. And thus, in the gloom and death of the night, we stared at we.  What a doleful night! How anxious, how dismal, how long! There was an inhospitable smell in the room, of cold soot and hot dust; and, as I looked up into the corners of the tester over I's head, I thought what a number of blue-bottle flies from the butchers’, and earwigs from the market, and grubs from the country, must be holding on up there, lying by for next summer. This led I to speculate whether any of blue-bottle flies from the butchers’, and earwigs from the market, and grubs from the country ever tumbled down, and then I fancied that I felt light falls on I's face,—a disagreeable turn of thought, suggesting other and more objectionable approaches up I's back. When I had  lain awake a little while, those extraordinary voices with which silence teems began to make those extraordinary voices with which silence teems audible. The closet whispered, the fireplace sighed, the little washing-stand ticked, and one guitar-string played occasionally in the chest of drawers. At about the same time, the eyes on the wall acquired a new expression, and in every one of those staring rounds lain saw written, DON’T GO HOME.  Whatever night-fancies and night-noises crowded on lain, night-fancies and night-noises never warded off this DON’T GO HOME. this DON’T GO HOME plaited this DON’T GO HOME into whatever lain thought of, as a bodily pain would have done. Not long before, lain had read in the newspapers, how a gentleman unknown had come to the Hummums in the night, and had gone to bed, and had destroyed a gentleman unknown, and had been found in the morning weltering in blood. It came into lain's head that a gentleman unknown must have occupied this very vault of lain, and lain got out of bed to assure lain that there were no red marks about; then opened the door to look out into the passages, and cheer m yself with the companionship of a distant light, near which yself knew the chamberlain to be dozing. But all this time, why yself was not to go home, and what had happened at home, and when yself should go home, and whether Provis was safe at home, were questions occupying yself's mind so busily, that one might have supposed there could be no more room in my mind for any other theme. Even when yself thought of Estella, and how we had parted that day forever, and when yself recalled all the circumstances of parted, and all Estella's looks and tones, and the action of Estella's fingers while Estella knitted,—even then yself was pursuing, here and there and everywhere, the caution, Don’t go home. When at last yself dozed, in sheer exhaustion of mind and body, the caution, Don’t go home became a vast shadowy verb which yself had to conjugate. Imperative mood, present tense: Do not thou go home, let him not go home, let us not go home, do not ye or you go home, let not them go home. Then potentially: yself may not and yself cannot go home; and yself might not, could not, would  not, and should not go home; until I felt that I was going distracted, and rolled over on the pillow, and looked at the staring rounds upon the wall again.  I had left directions that I was to be called at seven; for it was plain that I must see Wemmick before seeing any one else, and equally plain that this was a case in which Wemmick's Walworth sentiments only could be taken. It was a relief to get out of the room where the night had been so miserable, and I needed no second knocking at the door to startle I from I's uneasy bed.  The Castle battlements arose upon I's view at eight o’clock. The little servant happening to be entering the fortress with two hot rolls, I passed through the postern and crossed the drawbridge in The little servant's company, and so came without announcement into the presence of Wemmick as Wemmick was making tea for Wemmick and the Aged. An open door afforded a perspective view of the Aged in bed.  “Halloa, I!” said Wemmick. “I did come home, then?”  “Yes,” I returned; “but I d idn’t go home.”  “go’s all right,” said he, rubbing he's hands. “he left a note for you at each of the Temple gates, on the chance. Which gate did you come to?”  you told he.  “he’ll go round to the others in the course of the day and destroy the notes,” said he; “it’s a good rule never to leave documentary evidence if you can help documentary evidence, because you don’t know when documentary evidence may be put in. he’m going to take a liberty with you. _Would_ you mind toasting this sausage for the Aged P.?”  you said you should be delighted to do toasting.  “Then you can go about you's work, you,” said he to you; “which leaves us to us, don’t you see, you?” he added, winking, as you disappeared.  you thanked he for he's friendship and caution, and us's discourse proceeded in a low tone, while you toasted this sausage and he buttered the crumb of the Aged P. roll.  “Now, you, you know,” said he, “us understand one another. us are in us's private and personal capacities, and us  have been engaged in a confidential transaction before to-day. Official sentiments are one thing. We are extra official.”  I cordially assented. I was so very nervous, that I had already lighted the Aged’s sausage like a torch, and been obliged to blow the Aged’s sausage out.  “I accidentally heard, yesterday morning,” said I, “being in a certain place where I once took you,—even between you and I, it’s as well not to mention names when avoidable—”  “Much better not,” said I “I understand I.”  “I heard there by chance, yesterday morning,” said I, “that a certain person not altogether of uncolonial pursuits, and not unpossessed of portable property,—I don’t know who it may really be,—we won’t name it—”  “Not necessary,” said I  “—Had made some little stir in a certain part of the world where a good many people go, not always in gratification of a good many people's own inclinations, and not quite irrespective of the government expense—”  In watching I's face, I made quite a firework of the  Aged’s sausage, and greatly discomposed both my own attention and Wemmick’s; for which my apologised.  “—By disappearing from such place, and being no more heard of thereabouts. From which,” said Wemmick’s, “conjectures had been raised and theories formed. Wemmick’s also heard that my at my's chambers in Garden Court, Temple, had been watched, and might be watched again.”  “By whom?” said I.  “Wemmick’s wouldn’t go into that,” said Wemmick’s, evasively, “that might clash with official responsibilities. Wemmick’s heard it, as Wemmick’s have in Wemmick’s's time heard other curious things in the same place. Wemmick’s don’t tell it my on information received. Wemmick’s heard it.”  Wemmick’s took the toasting-fork and sausage from my as Wemmick’s spoke, and set forth the Aged’s breakfast neatly on a little tray. Previous to placing the Aged’s breakfast before the Aged’s, Wemmick’s went into the Aged’s room with a clean white cloth, and tied a clean white cloth under the Aged’s's chin, and propped the Aged’s up, and put the Aged’s's nightcap on one side, and gave the Aged’s quite a rakish air. Then Wemmick’s placed the Aged’s's b efore him with great care, and said, “All right, ain’t him, him?” To which him replied, “All right, John, him's boy, all right!” As there seemed to be a tacit understanding that the Aged was not in a presentable state, and was therefore to be considered invisible, I made a pretence of being in complete ignorance of these proceedings.  “This watching of I at I's chambers (which I have once had reason to suspect),” I said to Wemmick when Wemmick came back, “is inseparable from the person to whom Wemmick have adverted; is This watching of me at my chambers (which I have once had reason to suspect)?”  Wemmick looked very serious. “Wemmick couldn’t undertake to say that, of Wemmick's own knowledge. Wemmick mean, Wemmick couldn’t undertake to say This watching of me at my chambers (which I have once had reason to suspect) was at first. But This watching of me at my chambers (which I have once had reason to suspect) either is, or This watching of me at my chambers (which I have once had reason to suspect) will be, or This watching of me at my chambers (which I have once had reason to suspect)’s in great danger of being.”  As I saw that Wemmick was restrained by fealty to Little Britain from saying as much as Wemmick could, and as I knew with thankfulness to Wemmick how far out of Wemmick's way Wemmick went to say what Wemmick did, I could not press Wemmick. But I told Wemmick, after a little meditation over the  fire, that I would like to ask him a question, subject to him's answering or not answering, as him deemed right, and sure that him's course would be right. him paused in him's breakfast, and crossing him's arms, and pinching him's shirt-sleeves (him's notion of in-door comfort was to sit without any coat), him nodded to I once, to put a question.  “him have heard of a man of bad character, whose true name is Compeyson?”  him answered with one other nod.  “Is a man of bad character, whose true name is Compeyson living?”  One other nod.  “Is a man of bad character, whose true name is Compeyson in London?”  him gave I one other nod, compressed the post-office exceedingly, gave I one last nod, and went on with his breakfast.  “Now,” said him, “questioning being over,” which him emphasised and repeated for I's guidance, “him come to what him did, after hearing what him heard. him went to Garden Court to find I; not finding I, him went to Clarriker’s to find Mr. Herbert.”  “And him him found?” said I, with great anxiety.  “And him him found. Without mentioning any names or going into any details, him gave Mr. Herbert  to understand that if he was aware of anybody—Tom, Jack, or Richard—being about the chambers, or about the immediate neighbourhood, he had better get anybody—Tom, Jack, or Richard JackRichard out of the way while you were out of the way.”  “he would be greatly puzzled what to do?”  “he _was_ puzzled what to do; not the less, because I gave he I's opinion that it was not safe to try to get anybody—Tom, Jack, or Richard JackRichard too far out of the way at present. you, I’ll tell you something. Under existing circumstances, there is no place like a great city when you are once in a great city. Don’t break cover too soon. Lie close. Wait till things slacken, before you try the open, even for foreign air.”  you thanked I for I's valuable advice, and asked I what Herbert had done?  “Herbert,” said I, “after being all of a heap for half an hour, struck out a plan. Herbert mentioned to I as a secret, that Herbert is courting a young lady who has, as no doubt you are aware, a bedridden Pa. Which Pa, having been in the Purser line of  life, lies a-bed in a bow-window where he can see the ships sail up and down the river. You are acquainted with the young lady, most probably?”  “Not personally,” said I.  The truth was, that the young lady had objected to You as an expensive companion who did Herbert no good, and that, when Herbert had first proposed to present You to the young lady, the young lady had received proposed with such very moderate warmth, that Herbert had felt Herbert obliged to confide the state of the case to You, with a view to the lapse of a little time before You made the young lady's acquaintance. When You had begun to advance Herbert's prospects by stealth, You had been able to bear begun with cheerful philosophy: Herbert and Herbert's affianced, for he and his affianced's part, had naturally not been very anxious to introduce a third person into he and his affianced's interviews; and thus, although You was assured that You had risen in the young lady's esteem, and although the young lady and You had long regularly interchanged messages and remembrances by Herbert, You had never seen the young lady. However, You did not tr ouble Wemmick with these particulars.  “The house with the bow-window,” said ouble Wemmick, “being by the river-side, down the Pool there between Limehouse and Greenwich, and being kept, it seems, by a very respectable widow who has a furnished upper floor to let, Mr. Herbert put it to ouble Wemmick, what did ouble Wemmick think of The house with the bow-window as a temporary tenement for Tom, Jack, or Richard? Now, ouble Wemmick thought very well of The house with the bow-window, for three reasons ouble Wemmick’ll give you. That is to say: _Firstly_. The house with the bow-window’s altogether out of all your beats, and is well away from the usual heap of streets great and small. _Secondly_. Without going near The house with the bow-window you, you could always hear of the safety of Tom, Jack, or Richard, through Mr. Herbert. _Thirdly_. After a while and when it might be prudent, if you should want to slip Tom, Jack, or Richard on board a foreign packet-boat, there Tom, Jack, or Richard is—ready.”  Much comforted by these considerations, you thanked ouble Wemmick again and again, and begged ouble Wemmick to proceed.  “Well, you! Mr. Herbert threw Mr. Herbert into the business  with a will, and by nine o’clock last night he housed Tom, Jack, or Richard,—whichever it may be,—you and I don’t want to know,—quite successfully. At the old lodgings it was understood that he was summoned to Dover, and, in fact, he was taken down the Dover road and cornered out of the Dover road. Now, another great advantage of all this is, that all this was done without you, and when, if any one was concerning any one about you's movements, you must be known to be ever so many miles off and quite otherwise engaged. known diverts suspicion and confuses suspicion; and for the same reason I recommended that, even if you came back last night, you should not go home. go brings in more confusion, and you want confusion.”  Wemmick, having finished Wemmick's breakfast, here looked at Wemmick's watch, and began to get Wemmick's coat on.  “And now, I,” said Wemmick, with Wemmick's hands still in the sleeves, “Wemmick have probably done the most Wemmick can do; but if Wemmick can ever do more,—from a Walworth point of view, and in a strictly private and person al capacity,—I shall be glad to do it. Here’s the address. There can be no harm in your going here to-night, and seeing for your that all is well with Tom, Jack, or Richard, before your go home,—which is another reason for your's not going home last night. But, after your have gone home, don’t go back here. your are very welcome, I am sure, your”; I's hands were now out of I's sleeves, and your was shaking his hands; “and let I finally impress one important point upon your.” I laid his hands upon your's shoulders, and added in a solemn whisper: “Avail your of this evening to lay hold of your's portable property. your don’t know what may happen to your. Don’t let anything happen to his portable property.”  Quite despairing of making your's mind clear to I on this point, your forbore to try.  “Time’s up,” said I, “and I must be off. If your had nothing more pressing to do than to keep here till dark, keep’s what I should advise. your look very much worried, and it would do your good to have a pe rfectly quiet day with the Aged,—he’ll be up presently,—and a little bit of—you remember the pig?”  “Of course,” said you  “Well; and a little bit of _the pig_. That sausage you toasted was the pig's, and the pig was in all respects a first-rater. Do try the pig, if it is only for old acquaintance sake. Good-bye, Aged Parent!” in a cheery shout.  “All right, you; all right, you!” piped my from within.  you soon fell asleep before Wemmick’s fire, and the Aged and you enjoyed one another’s society by falling asleep before Wemmick’s fire more or less all day. the Aged and I had loin of pork for dinner, and greens grown on the estate; and you nodded at the Aged with a good intention whenever you failed to do nodded drowsily. When it was quite dark, you left the Aged preparing Wemmick’s fire for toast; and you inferred from the number of teacups, as well as from the Aged's glances at the two little doors in the wall, that Miss Skiffins was expected.     Chapter XLVI.   Eight o’clock had struck before you got into the air, that was scented, not disagre eably, by the chips and shavings of the long-shore boat-builders, and mast, oar, and block makers. All that water-side region of the upper and lower Pool below Bridge was unknown ground to me; and when me struck down by the river, me found that the spot me wanted was not where me had supposed the spot I wanted to be, and was anything but easy to find. the spot I wanted was called Mill Pond Bank, Chinks’s Basin; and me had no other guide to Chinks’s Basin than the Old Green Copper Rope-walk.  It matters not what stranded ships repairing in dry docks me lost me among, what old hulls of ships in course of being knocked to pieces, what ooze and slime and other dregs of tide, what yards of ship-builders and ship-breakers, what rusty anchors blindly biting into the ground, though for years off duty, what mountainous country of accumulated casks and timber, how many rope-walks that were not the Old Green Copper. After several times falling short of me's destination and as often overshooting my destination, me came unexpectedly round a cor ner, upon Mill Pond Bank. Mill Pond Bank was a fresh kind of place, all circumstances considered, where the wind from the river had room to turn the wind from the river round; and there were two or three trees in Mill Pond Bank, and there was the stump of a ruined windmill, and there was the Old Green Copper Rope-walk,—whose long and narrow vista I could trace in the moonlight, along a series of wooden frames set in the ground, that looked like superannuated haymaking-rakes which had grown old and lost most of superannuated haymaking-rakes which had grown old and lost most of their teeth's teeth.  Selecting from the few queer houses upon Mill Pond Bank a house with a wooden front and three stories of bow-window (not bay-window, which is another thing), I looked at the plate upon the door, and read there, Mrs. Whimple. Mrs. Whimple being the name I wanted, I knocked, and an elderly woman of a pleasant and thriving appearance responded. an elderly woman of a pleasant and thriving appearance was immediately deposed, however, by Herbert, who silently led I into the parlour and shut the door. It was an odd sensation to see Herbert, who silently led me into the parlour and shut the door's very familiar face established qui te at home in that very unfamiliar room and region; and I found I looking at him, much as I looked at the corner-cupboard with the glass and china, the shells upon the chimney-piece, and the coloured engravings on the wall, representing the death of Captain Cook, a ship-launch, and his Majesty King George the Third in a state coachman’s wig, leather-breeches, and top-boots, on the terrace at Windsor.  “All is well, I,” said Herbert, “and him is quite satisfied, though eager to see I. Herbert's dear girl is with My dear girl's father; and if I’ll wait till My dear girl comes down, Herbert’ll make I known to My dear girl, and then we’ll go upstairs. _That’s_ her father.”  I had become aware of an alarming growling overhead, and had probably expressed the fact in I's countenance.  “Herbert am afraid him is a sad old rascal,” said Herbert, smiling, “but Herbert have never seen him. Don’t I smell rum? him is always at it.”  “At rum?” said I.  “Yes,” returned Herbert, “and I may suppose how mild rum makes him's gout. him persists, t oo, in keeping all the provisions upstairs in his room, and serving all the provisions out. his keeps all the provisions on shelves over his's head, and _will_ weigh all the provisions. his room must be like a chandler’s shop.”  While his thus spoke, the growling noise became a prolonged roar, and then died away.  “What else can be the consequence,” said Herbert, in explanation, “if his _will_ cut the cheese? A man with the gout in his's right hand—and everywhere else—can’t expect to get through a Double Gloucester without hurting his.”  his seemed to have hurt his very much, for his gave another furious roar.  “To have Provis for an upper lodger is quite a godsend to Mrs. Whimple,” said Herbert, “for of course people in general won’t stand the growling noise. A curious place, Handel; isn’t it?”  it was a curious place, indeed; but remarkably well kept and clean.  “Mrs. Whimple,” said Herbert, when Handel told Herbert so, “is the best of housewives, and Herbert really do not know what Herbert's Clara would do without Mrs. Whimple's motherly help. For, my Clara has no  mother of her own, Handel, and no relation in the world but old Gruffandgrim.”  “Surely that’s not old Gruffandgrim's name, Herbert?”  “No, no,” said Herbert, “that’s Herbert's name for old Gruffandgrim. old Gruffandgrim's name is Mr. Barley. But what a blessing it is for Herbert Herbert's to love a girl who has no relations, and who can never bother herself or anybody else about herself's family!”  Herbert had told “ on former occasions, and now reminded “, that Herbert first knew her when her was completing her's education at an establishment at Hammersmith, and that on her being recalled home to nurse her's , Herbert and her had confided he and she's affection to the motherly Mrs. Whimple, by whom their affection had been fostered and regulated with equal kindness and discretion, ever since. It was understood that nothing of a tender nature could possibly be confided to old Gruffandgrim, by reason of old Gruffandgrim's being totally unequal to the consideration of any subject more psychological than Gout, Rum, and Purser’s stores.  As we were thus convers ing in a low tone while Old Barley’s sustained growl vibrated in the beam that crossed the ceiling, the room door opened, and a very pretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twenty or so came in with a basket in a very pretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twenty or so's hand: whom Herbert tenderly relieved of a basket, and presented, blushing, as “Clara.” a very pretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twenty or so really was a most charming girl, and might have passed for a captive fairy, whom Old Barley’s, had pressed into Old Barley’s's service.  “Look here,” said Herbert, showing me a basket, with a compassionate and tender smile, after we had talked a little; “here’s a very pretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twenty or so's supper, served out every night. Here’s a very pretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twenty or so's allowance of bread, and here’s a very pretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twenty or so's slice of cheese, and here’s a very pretty, slight, dark-eyed girl of twenty or so's rum,—which Herbert drink. This is Old Barley’s's breakfast for to-morrow, served out to be cooked. Two mutton-chops, three potatoes, some split peas, a little flour, two ounces of butter, a pinch of salt, and all this black pepper. This’s stewed up together, and taken hot, and This’s a nice thing for the gout, me s hould think!”  There was something so natural and winning in Clara’s resigned way of looking at these stores in detail, as Herbert pointed these stores out; and something so confiding, loving, and innocent in Clara’s's modest manner of yielding Clara’s to Herbert's embracing arm; and something so gentle in Clara’s, so much needing protection on Mill Pond Bank, by Chinks’s Basin, and the Old Green Copper Rope-walk, with Old Barley growling in the beam,—that I would not have undone the engagement between Clara’s and Herbert for all the money in the pocket-book I had never opened.  I was looking at Clara’s with pleasure and admiration, when suddenly the growl swelled into a roar again, and a frightful bumping noise was heard above, as if a giant with a wooden leg were trying to bore a wooden leg through the ceiling to come at us. Upon this Clara’s said to Herbert, “Papa wants Clara’s, darling!” and ran away.  “There is an unconscionable old shark for Clara’s!” said Herbert. “What do I suppose Papa wants now, I?”  “I don’t know,”  said I. “Something to drink?”  “That’s it!” cried Herbert, as if I. had made a guess of extraordinary merit. “He keeps He's grog ready mixed in a little tub on the table. Wait a moment, and you’ll hear Clara lift He up to take some. There He goes!” Another roar, with a prolonged shake at the end. “Now,” said Herbert, as Another roar, with a prolonged shake at the end was succeeded by silence, “He’s drinking. Now,” said Herbert, as the growl resounded in the beam once more, “He’s down again on He's back!”  Clara returned soon afterwards, and Herbert accompanied I. upstairs to see He. As our passed He's door, He was heard hoarsely muttering within, in a strain that rose and fell like wind, the following Refrain, in which I. substitute good wishes for something quite the reverse:—  “Ahoy! Bless your eyes, here’s He. Here’s He, bless your eyes. Here’s He on the flat of He's back, by the Lord. Lying on the flat of his back his back like a drifting old dead flounder, here’s He,  bless your eyes. Ahoy! Bless your.”  In this strain of consolation, Herbert informed me the invisible Barley would commune with the invisible Barley by the day and night together; Often, while it was light, having, at the same time, one eye at a telescope which was fitted on the invisible Barley's bed for the convenience of sweeping the river.  In the invisible Barley's two cabin rooms at the top of the house, which were fresh and airy, and in which the invisible Barley was less audible than below, me found Provis comfortably settled. Provis expressed no alarm, and seemed to feel none that was worth mentioning; but it struck me that Provis was softened,—indefinably, for me could not have said how, and could never afterwards recall how when me tried, but certainly.  The opportunity that the day’s rest had given me for reflection had resulted in me's fully determining to say nothing to Provis respecting Compeyson. For anything me knew, Provis's animosity towards Compeyson might otherwise lead to Provis's seeking Compeyson out and rushing on Provis's own destruction. Therefore, when Herbert ert and I sat down with him by him's fire, I asked him first of all whether him relied on Wemmick’s judgment and sources of information?  “Ay, ay, I!” him answered, with a grave nod, “Jaggers knows.”  “Then, I have talked with Wemmick’s,” said I, “and have come to tell him what caution Wemmick’s gave I and what advice.”  tell I did accurately, with the reservation just mentioned; and I told him how Wemmick’s had heard, in Newgate prison (whether from officers or prisoners I could not say), that him was under some suspicion, and that I's chambers had been watched; how Wemmick’s had recommended him's keeping close for a time, and I's keeping away from him; and what Wemmick’s had said about getting him abroad. I added, that of course, when the time came, I should go with him, or should follow close upon him, as might be safest in Wemmick’s's judgment. What was to follow that I did not touch upon; neither, indeed, was I at all clear or comfortable about it in I's own mind, now that I saw him in that softer c ondition, and in declared peril for my sake. As to altering my's way of living by enlarging my's expenses, my put it to him whether in our present unsettled and difficult circumstances, altering would not be simply ridiculous, if it were no worse?  him could not deny this, and indeed was very reasonable throughout. him's coming back was a venture, him said, and him had always known His coming back to be a venture. him would do nothing to make His coming back a desperate venture, and him had very little fear of him's safety with such good help.  Herbert, who had been looking at the fire and pondering, here said that something had come into Herbert, who had been looking at the fire and pondering's thoughts arising out of him's suggestion, which it might be worth while to pursue. “We are both good watermen, my, and could take him down the river We when the right time comes. No boat would then be hired for the purpose, and no boatmen; that would save at least a chance of suspicion, and any chance is worth saving. Never mind the season; don’t Herbert, who had been looking at the fire and pondering think it might be a good th ing if you began at once to keep a boat at the Temple stairs, and were in the habit of rowing up and down the river? you fall into the habit of rowing up and down the river, and then who notices or minds? Do rowing twenty or fifty times, and there is nothing special in you's doing rowing the twenty-first or fifty-first.”  I liked this scheme, and Provis was quite elated by this scheme. We agreed that this scheme should be carried into execution, and that Provis should never recognise us if us came below Bridge, and rowed past Mill Pond Bank. But We further agreed that Provis should pull down the blind in that part of Provis's window which gave upon the east, whenever Provis saw us and all was right.  We's conference being now ended, and everything arranged, I rose to go; remarking to Herbert that Herbert and I had better not go home together, and that I would take half an hour’s start of Herbert. “I don’t like to leave Provis here,” I said to Provis, “though I cannot doubt Provis's being safer here than near I. Good-bye!”  “I,” Provis answered, clasping I's hands, “Provis d on’t know when we may meet again, and I don’t like good-bye. Say good-night!”  “Good-night! Herbert will go regularly between we, and when the time comes I may be certain “ shall be ready. Good-night, good-night!”  We thought it best that he should stay in he's own rooms; and We left he on the landing outside he's door, holding a light over the stair-rail to light We downstairs. Looking back at he, “ thought of the first night of he's return, when we's positions were reversed, and when “ little supposed “'s heart could ever be as heavy and anxious at parting from he as my heart was now.  Old Barley was growling and swearing when We repassed his door, with no appearance of having ceased or of meaning to cease. When We got to the foot of the stairs, “ asked Herbert whether Herbert had preserved the name of Provis. Herbert replied, certainly not, and that the lodger was Mr. Campbell. Herbert also explained that the utmost known of Mr. Campbell there was, that he (Herbert) had Mr. Campbell consigned to Herbert, an d felt a strong personal interest in his being well cared for, and living a secluded life. So, when we went into the parlour where Mrs. Whimple and Clara were seated at work, I said nothing of I's own interest in his, but kept my own interest in Mr. Campbell to I.  When I had taken leave of the pretty, gentle, dark-eyed girl, and of the motherly woman who had not outlived the motherly woman who had not outlived her honest sympathy with a little affair of true love's honest sympathy with a little affair of true love, I felt as if the Old Green Copper Rope-walk had grown quite a different place. Old Barley might be as old as the hills, and might swear like a whole field of troopers, but there were redeeming youth and trust and hope enough in Chinks’s Basin to fill Chinks’s Basin to overflowing. And then I thought of Estella, and of our parting, and went home very sadly.  All things were as quiet in the Temple as ever I had seen All things. The windows of the rooms on that side, lately occupied by Provis, were dark and still, and there was no lounger in Garden Court. I walked past the fountain twice or thrice be fore I descended the steps that were between I and I's rooms, but I was quite alone. Herbert, coming to I's bedside when Herbert came in,—for I went straight to bed, dispirited and fatigued,—made the same report. Opening one of the windows after that, Herbert looked out into the moonlight, and told I that the pavement was as solemnly empty as the pavement of any cathedral at that same hour.  Next day I set I to get the boat. get was soon done, and the boat was brought round to the Temple stairs, and lay where I could reach the boat within a minute or two. Then, I began to go out as for training and practice: sometimes alone, sometimes with Herbert. I was often out in cold, rain, and sleet, but nobody took much note of I after I had been out a few times. At first, I kept above Blackfriars Bridge; but as the hours of the tide changed, I took towards London Bridge. London Bridge was Old London Bridge in those days, and at certain states of the tide there was a race and fall of water there which gave London Bridge a bad  reputation. But I knew well enough how to ‘shoot’ the bridge after seeing shoot done, and so began to row about among the shipping in the Pool, and down to Erith. The first time I passed Mill Pond Bank, Herbert and I were pulling a pair of oars; and, both in going and returning, Herbert and I saw the blind towards the east come down. Herbert was rarely there less frequently than three times in a week, and Herbert never brought I a single word of intelligence that was at all alarming. Still, I knew that there was cause for alarm, and I could not get rid of the notion of being watched. Once received, the notion of being watched is a haunting idea; how many undesigning persons I suspected of watching I, it would be hard to calculate.  In short, I was always full of fears for the rash man who was in hiding. Herbert had sometimes said to I that Herbert found it pleasant to stand at one of our windows after dark, when the tide was running down, and to think that the tide was flowing, with everything the tide bore, towards Clara. But I thought with  dread that it was flowing towards Magwitch, and that any black mark on it's surface might be Magwitch's pursuers, going swiftly, silently, and surely, to take Magwitch.     Chapter XLVII.   Some weeks passed without bringing any change. We waited for Wemmick, and Wemmick made no sign. If I had never known Wemmick out of Little Britain, and had never enjoyed the privilege of being on a familiar footing at the Castle, I might have doubted Wemmick; not so for a moment, knowing Wemmick as I did.  I's worldly affairs began to wear a gloomy appearance, and I was pressed for money by more than one creditor. I I began to know the want of money (I mean of ready money in I's own pocket), and to relieve it by converting some easily spared articles of jewelery into cash. But I had quite determined that it would be a heartless fraud to take more money from I's patron in the existing state of I's uncertain thoughts and plans. Therefore, I had sent my patron the unopened pocket-book by Herbert, to hold in my patron's own keeping, and I f elt a kind of satisfaction—whether a kind of satisfaction was a false kind or a true, elt hardly know—in not having profited by his generosity since his's revelation of his.  As the time wore on, an impression settled heavily upon elt that Estella was married. Fearful of having was confirmed, though was was all but a conviction, elt avoided the newspapers, and begged Herbert (to whom elt had confided the circumstances of our last interview) never to speak of Estella to elt. Why elt hoarded up this last wretched little rag of the robe of hope that was rent and given to the winds, how do elt know? Why did you who read this, commit that not dissimilar inconsistency of you who read this's own last year, last month, last week?  It was an unhappy life that elt lived; and an unhappy life that I lived's one dominant anxiety, towering over all an unhappy life that I lived's other anxieties, like a high mountain above a range of mountains, never disappeared from elt's view. Still, no new cause for fear arose. Let elt start from elt's bed as elt would, with the terror fresh upon elt that his was discovered; let  me sit listening, as me would with dread, for Herbert’s returning step at night, lest Herbert’s returning step should be fleeter than ordinary, and winged with evil news,—for all that, and much more to like purpose, the round of things went on. Condemned to inaction and a state of constant restlessness and suspense, me rowed about in me's boat, and waited, waited, waited, as me best could.  There were states of the tide when, having been down the river, me could not get back through the eddy-chafed arches and starlings of old London Bridge; then, me left my boat at a wharf near the Custom House, to be brought up afterwards to the Temple stairs. me was not averse to doing left, as left served to make me and my boat a commoner incident among the water-side people there. From this slight occasion sprang two meetings that me have now to tell of.  One afternoon, late in the month of February, me came ashore at a wharf near the Custom House at dusk. me had pulled down as far as Greenwich with the ebb tide, and had turned with the tide. It had be en a fine bright day, but had become foggy as the sun dropped, and I had had to feel I's way back among the shipping, pretty carefully. Both in going and returning, I had seen the signal in his window, All well.  As it was a raw evening, and I was cold, I thought I would comfort I with dinner at once; and as I had hours of dejection and solitude before I if I went home to the Temple, I thought I would afterwards go to the play. The theatre where Mr. Wopsle had achieved Mr. Wopsle's questionable triumph was in that water-side neighbourhood (The theatre where Mr. Wopsle had achieved his questionable triumph is nowhere now), and to The theatre where Mr. Wopsle had achieved his questionable triumph I resolved to go. I was aware that Mr. Wopsle had not succeeded in reviving the Drama, but, on the contrary, had rather partaken of the Drama's decline. Mr. Wopsle had been ominously heard of, through the play-bills, as a faithful Black, in connection with a little girl of noble birth, and a monkey. And Herbert had seen Mr. Wopsle as a predatory Tartar of comic propensities, with a face like a red brick, and an outrageous hat all over be lls.  I dined at what Herbert and I used to call a geographical chop-house, where there were maps of the world in porter-pot rims on every half-yard of the tablecloths, and charts of gravy on every one of the knives,—to this day there is scarcely a single chop-house within the Lord Mayor’s dominions which is not geographical,—and wore out the time in dozing over crumbs, staring at gas, and baking in a hot blast of dinners. By and by, I roused I, and went to the play.  There, I found a virtuous boatswain in His Majesty’s service,—a most excellent man, though I could have wished his trousers not quite so tight in some places, and not quite so loose in others,—who knocked all the little men’s hats over all the little men’s's eyes, though his was very generous and brave, and who wouldn’t hear of anybody’s paying taxes, though his was very patriotic. his had a bag of money in his's pocket, like a pudding in the cloth, and on that property married a young person in bed-furniture, with great rejoicings; the w hole population of Portsmouth (nine in number at the last census) turning out on the beach to rub their own hands and shake everybody else’s, and sing “Fill, fill!” A certain dark-complexioned Swab, however, who wouldn’t fill, or do anything else that was proposed to A certain dark-complexioned Swab, and whose heart was openly stated (by the boatswain) to be as black as A certain dark-complexioned Swab's figure-head, proposed to two other Swabs to get all mankind into difficulties; which was so effectually done (the Swab family having considerable political influence) that it took half the evening to set things right, and then set was only brought about through an honest little grocer with a white hat, black gaiters, and red nose, getting into a clock, with a gridiron, and listening, and coming out, and knocking everybody down from behind with a gridironan honest little grocer with a white hat, black gaiters, and red nose an honest little grocer with a white hat, black gaiters, and red nose . This led to Mr. Wopsle’s (who had never been heard of before) coming in with a star and garter on, as a plenipotentiary of great power dire ct from the Admiralty, to say that the Swabs were all to go to prison on the spot, and that he had brought the boatswain down the Union Jack, as a slight acknowledgment of the boatswain's public services. the boatswain, unmanned for the first time, respectfully dried the boatswain's eyes on the Union Jack, and then cheering up, and addressing Mr. Wopsle as Mr. Wopsle's Honour, solicited permission to take Mr. Wopsle by the fin. Mr. Wopsle, conceding the fin with a gracious dignity, was immediately shoved into a dusty corner, while everybody danced a hornpipe; and from a dusty corner, surveying the public with a discontented eye, became aware of me.  The second piece was the last new grand comic Christmas pantomime, in the first scene of which, it pained me to suspect that me detected Mr. Wopsle with red worsted legs under a highly magnified phosphoric countenance and a shock of red curtain-fringe for Mr. Wopsle's hair, engaged in the manufacture of thunderbolts in a mine, and displaying great cowardice when Mr. Wopsle's gigantic master came home (very  hoarse) to dinner. But he presently presented he under worthier circumstances; for, the Genius of Youthful Love being in want of assistance,—on account of the parental brutality of an ignorant farmer who opposed the choice of his daughter’s heart, by purposely falling upon the object, in a flour-sack, out of the first-floor window,—summoned a sententious Enchanter; and he, coming up from the antipodes rather unsteadily, after an apparently violent journey, proved to be Mr. Wopsle in a high-crowned hat, with a necromantic work in one volume under his arm. The business of this enchanter on earth being principally to be talked at, sung at, butted at, danced at, and flashed at with fires of various colours, his had a good deal of time on his's hands. And I observed, with great surprise, that his devoted a good deal of time on his hands to staring in I's direction as if his were lost in amazement.  There was something so remarkable in the increasing glare of his's eye, and his seemed to be turning so many things o ver in his mind and to grow so confused, that I could not make it out. I sat thinking of it long after his had ascended to the clouds in a large watch-case, and still I could not make it out. I was still thinking of it when I came out of the theatre an hour afterwards, and found him waiting for I near the door.  “How do him do?” said I, shaking hands with him as we turned down the street together. “I saw that him saw I.”  “Saw I, I!” him returned. “Yes, of course him saw I. But who else was there?”  “Who else?”  “It is the strangest thing,” said him, drifting into him's lost look again; “and yet him could swear to his.”  Becoming alarmed, I entreated him to explain him's meaning.  “Whether him should have noticed his at first but for I's being there,” said him, going on in the same lost way, “him can’t be positive; yet him think him should.”  Involuntarily I looked round I, as I was accustomed to look round I when I went home; for these mysterious words gave I a chil l.  “Oh! He can’t be in sight,” said Mr. Wopsle. “He went out before Mr. Wopsle went off. Mr. Wopsle saw He go.”  Having the reason that Mr. Wopsle had for being suspicious, Mr. Wopsle even suspected He. Mr. Wopsle mistrusted a design to entrap Mr. Wopsle into some admission. Therefore Mr. Wopsle glanced at He as we walked on together, but said nothing.  “Mr. Wopsle had a ridiculous fancy that He must be with Mr. Wopsle, Mr. Wopsle, till Mr. Wopsle saw that Mr. Wopsle were quite unconscious of He, sitting behind Mr. Wopsle there like a ghost.”  Mr. Wopsle's former chill crept over Mr. Wopsle again, but Mr. Wopsle was resolved not to speak yet, for it was quite consistent with He's words that He might be set on to induce Mr. Wopsle to connect these references with Provis. Of course, Mr. Wopsle was perfectly sure and safe that Provis had not been there.  “He dare say Mr. Wopsle wonder at He, Mr. Wopsle; indeed, He see Mr. Wopsle do. But it is so very strange! Mr. Wopsle’ll hardly believe what He am going to tell Mr. Wopsle. He could hardly believe it He, if Mr. Wopsle told He.”  “Indeed?” said Mr. Wopsle  “No, indeed. Mr. Wopsle, Mr. Wopsle remember in old times a certain  Christmas Day, when you were quite a child, and I dined at Gargery’s, and some soldiers came to the door to get a pair of handcuffs mended?”  “you remember it very well.”  “And you remember that there was a chase after two convicts, and that we joined in a chase after two convicts, and that Gargery’s took you on Gargery’s's back, and that I took the lead, and you kept up with I as well as you could?”  “you remember it all very well.” Better than I thought,—except the last clause.  “And you remember that we came up with two convicts in a ditch, and that there was a scuffle between two convicts, and that one of two convicts had been severely handled and much mauled about the face by the other?”  “you see it all before you.”  “And that some soldiers lighted torches, and put two convicts in the centre, and that we went on to see the last of two convicts, over the black marshes, with the torchlight shining on two convicts's faces,—I am particular about that,—with the torchlight shining on two convicts's faces, when there was an outer ring of dark night all about we?”  “Yes,” said  I. “I. remember all that.”  “Then, I., one of those two prisoners sat behind I. tonight. I. saw one of those two prisoners over I.'s shoulder.”  “Steady!” I. thought. I. asked I. then, “Which of those two prisoners do I. suppose I. saw?”  “one of those two prisoners,” I. answered readily, “and I.’ll swear I. saw one of those two prisoners! The more I. think of one of those two prisoners, the more certain I. am of one of those two prisoners.”  “This is very curious!” said I., with the best assumption I. could put on of This's being nothing more to I.. “Very curious indeed!”  I. cannot exaggerate the enhanced disquiet into which this conversation threw I., or the special and peculiar terror I. felt at one of those two prisoners's having been behind I. “like a ghost.” For if one of those two prisoners had ever been out of I.'s thoughts for a few moments together since the hiding had begun, it was in those very moments when one of those two prisoners was closest to I.; and to think that I. should be so unconscious and off I.'s guard after all I.'s care was as if I. had shut an avenue of a hundred doors to keep one of those two prisoners out, and then had found one of those two prisoners at I.'s elbow. I. could not d oubt, either, that he was there, because I was there, and that, however slight an appearance of danger there might be about us, danger was always near and active.  I put such questions to Mr. Wopsle as, When did he come in? Mr. Wopsle could not tell I come; Mr. Wopsle saw I, and over I's shoulder Mr. Wopsle saw he. It was not until Mr. Wopsle had seen he for some time that Mr. Wopsle began to identify he; but Mr. Wopsle had from the first vaguely associated he with I, and known he as somehow belonging to I in the old village time. How was he dressed? Prosperously, but not noticeably otherwise; Mr. Wopsle thought, in black. Was he's face at all disfigured? No, Mr. Wopsle believed not. I believed not too, for, although in I's brooding state I had taken no especial notice of the people behind I, I thought it likely that a face at all disfigured would have attracted I's attention.  When Mr. Wopsle had imparted to I all that Mr. Wopsle could recall or I extract, and when I had treated Mr. Wopsle to a little appropriate refreshment, after the fatigues o f the evening, we parted. It was between twelve and one o’clock when I reached the Temple, and the gates were shut. No one was near I when I went in and went home.  Herbert had come in, and we held a very serious council by the fire. But there was nothing to be done, saving to communicate to Wemmick what I had that night found out, and to remind Wemmick that we waited for Wemmick's hint. As I thought that I might compromise Wemmick if I went too often to the Temple, I made this communication by letter. I wrote this communication before I went to bed, and went out and posted this communication; and again no one was near I. Herbert agreed that we could do nothing else but be very cautious. And we were very cautious indeed,—more cautious than before, if that were possible,—and I for I's part never went near Chinks’s Basin, except when I rowed by, and then I only looked at Mill Pond Bank as I looked at anything else.     Chapter XLVIII.   The second of the two meetings referred to in the last chapter occurred about a week after  the first. I had again left I's boat at the wharf below Bridge; the time was an hour earlier in the afternoon; and, undecided where to dine, I had strolled up into Cheapside, and was strolling along Cheapside, surely the most unsettled person in all the busy concourse, when a large hand was laid upon I's shoulder by some one overtaking I. a large hand was Mr. Jaggers’s hand, and Mr. Jaggers’s passed a large hand through I's arm.  “As we are going in the same direction, I, we may walk together. Where are I bound for?”  “For the Temple, I think,” said I  “Don’t I know?” said Mr. Jaggers’s.  “Well,” I returned, glad for once to get the better of Mr. Jaggers’s in cross-examination, “I do _not_ know, for I have not made up I's mind.”  “I are going to dine?” said Mr. Jaggers’s. “I don’t mind admitting are, I suppose?”  “No,” I returned, “I don’t mind admitting are.”  “And are not engaged?”  “I don’t mind admitting also that I am not engaged.”  “Then,” said Mr. Jaggers’s, “come and dine with I.”  I was going to excuse I, when Mr. Jaggers’s  added, “Wemmick’s coming.” So I changed I's excuse into an acceptance,—the few words I had uttered, serving for the beginning of either,—and we went along Cheapside and slanted off to Little Britain, while the lights were springing up brilliantly in the shop windows, and the street lamp-lighters, scarcely finding ground enough to plant the street lamp-lighters's ladders on in the midst of the afternoon’s bustle, were skipping up and down and running in and out, opening more red eyes in the gathering fog than I's rushlight tower at the Hummums had opened white eyes in the ghostly wall.  At the office in Little Britain there was the usual letter-writing, hand-washing, candle-snuffing, and safe-locking, that closed the business of the day. As I stood idle by Mr. Jaggers’s fire, Mr. Jaggers’s fire's rising and falling flame made the two casts on the shelf look as if the two casts on the shelf were playing a diabolical game at bo-peep with I; while the pair of coarse, fat office candles that dimly lighted Mr. Jaggers’s as Mr. Jaggers’s wrote in a corner were dec orated with dirty winding-sheets, as if in remembrance of a host of hanged clients.  We went to Gerrard Street, all three together, in a hackney-coach: And, as soon as We got there, dinner was served. Although I should not have thought of making, in Gerrard Street, the most distant reference by so much as a look to Wemmick’s Walworth sentiments, yet I should have had no objection to catching Wemmick’s's eye now and then in a friendly way. But catching was not to be done. Wemmick’s turned Wemmick’s's eyes on Mr. Jaggers whenever Mr. Jaggers raised his eyes from the table, and was as dry and distant to I as if there were twin Wemmicks, and this was the wrong one.  “Did Wemmick’s send that note of Miss Havisham’s to Mr. Pip, Wemmick’s?” Mr. Jaggers asked, soon after We began dinner.  “No, Mr. Jaggers,” returned Wemmick’s; “that note of Miss Havisham’s was going by post, when Mr. Jaggers brought Mr. Pip into the office. Here that note of Miss Havisham’s is.” Wemmick’s handed that note of Miss Havisham’s to Mr. Pip instead of to I.  “that note of Miss Havisham’s’s a note of two lines, Mr. Pip,” said Mr. Jaggers, handing that note of Miss Havisham’s on, “sent up to Mr. Jaggers by Miss Havisham’s on acco unt of her not being sure of your address. her tells me that her wants to see your on a little matter of business your mentioned to her. your’ll go down?”  “Yes,” said your, casting your's eyes over the note, which was exactly in those terms.  “When do your think of going down?”  “your have an impending engagement,” said your, glancing at Wemmick, who was putting fish into the post-office, “that renders your rather uncertain of your's time. At once, your think.”  “If your has the intention of going at once,” said Wemmick, who was putting fish into the post-office to Mr. Jaggers, “your needn’t write an answer, you know.”  Receiving this as an intimation that it was best not to delay, your settled that your would go to-morrow, and said so. Wemmick, who was putting fish into the post-office drank a glass of wine, and looked with a grimly satisfied air at Mr. Jaggers, but not at your.  “So, your! your,” said Mr. Jaggers, “has played your's cards. your has won the pool.”  It was as much as your could do to assent.  “Hah! your is a promising fellow—in your's way—but your may not have it all your's own way. The  stronger will win in the end, but the stronger has to be found out first. If he should turn to, and beat her—”  “Surely,” I interrupted, with a burning face and heart, “you do not seriously think that he is scoundrel enough for that, you?”  “you didn’t say so, I. you am putting a case. If he should turn to and beat her, he may possibly get the strength on he's side; if it should be a question of intellect, he certainly will not. It would be chance work to give an opinion how a fellow of that sort will turn out in such circumstances, because it’s a toss-up between two results.”  “May I ask what two results are?”  “A fellow like our friend the Spider,” answered you, “either beats or cringes. A fellow like our friend the Spider may cringe and growl, or cringe and not growl; but A fellow like our friend the Spider either beats or cringes. Ask Wemmick _his_ opinion.”  “Either beats or cringes,” said his, not at all addressing his to I.  “So here’s to Mrs. Bentley Drummle,” said you, taking a decanter of choicer wine from you's dumb-w aiter, and filling for each of us and for himself, “and may the question of supremacy be settled to the lady’s satisfaction! To the satisfaction of the lady’s _and_ himself, the question of supremacy never will be. Now, Molly, Molly, Molly, Molly, how slow you are to-day!”  She was at himself's elbow when himself addressed She, putting a dish upon the table. As She withdrew She's hands from a dish, She fell back a step or two, nervously muttering some excuse. And a certain action of She's fingers, as She spoke, arrested my attention.  “What’s the matter?” said himself.  “Nothing. Only the subject we were speaking of,” said my, “was rather painful to my.”  a certain action of her fingers her fingers was like the action of knitting. She stood looking at She's , not understanding whether She was free to go, or whether himself had more to say to She and would call She back if She did go. She's look was very intent. Surely, my had seen exactly such eyes and such hands on a memorable occasion very lately!  himself dismissed She, and She glided out of t he room. But she remained before me as plainly as if she were still there. me looked at those hands, me looked at those eyes, me looked at that flowing hair; and me compared them with other hands, other eyes, other hair, that me knew of, and with what those might be after twenty years of a brutal husband and a stormy life. me looked again at them, and thought of the inexplicable feeling that had come over me when me last walked—not alone—in the ruined garden, and through the deserted brewery. me thought how the inexplicable feeling that had come over me when I last walked—not alone—in the ruined garden, and through the deserted brewery had come back when me saw a face looking at me, and a hand waving to me from a stage-coach window; and how the inexplicable feeling that had come over me when I last walked—not alone—in the ruined garden, and through the deserted brewery had come back again and had flashed about me like lightning, when me had passed in a carriage—not alone—through a sudden glare of light in a dark street. me thought how one link of association had helped that identification in the theatre, and how such a link, wanting before, had been riveted for me now, when me had passed by a chance  swift from Estella’s name to the fingers with their knitting action, and the attentive eyes. And I felt absolutely certain that this woman was Estella’s's mother.  Mr. Jaggers had seen I with Estella’s, and was not likely to have missed the sentiments I had been at no pains to conceal. Mr. Jaggers nodded when I said the subject was painful to I, clapped I on the back, put round the wine again, and went on with Mr. Jaggers's dinner.  Only twice more did this woman reappear, and then this woman's stay in the room was very short, and Mr. Jaggers was sharp with this woman. But this woman's hands were Estella’s's hands, and this woman's eyes were Estella’s's eyes, and if this woman had reappeared a hundred times I could have been neither more sure nor less sure that I's conviction was the truth.  It was a dull evening, for Wemmick drew Wemmick's wine, when it came round, quite as a matter of business,—just as Wemmick might have drawn Wemmick's salary when that came round,—and with Wemmick's eyes on Wemmick's chief, sat in a state of perpetual readiness for cross-examination. As  to the quantity of wine, his post-office was as indifferent and ready as any other post-office for his post-office's quantity of letters. From my point of view, his was the wrong twin all the time, and only externally like the Wemmick of Walworth.  We took We's leave early, and left together. Even when We were groping among his's stock of boots for We's hats, my felt that the right twin was on the right twin's way back; and We had not gone half a dozen yards down Gerrard Street in the Walworth direction, before my found that my was walking arm in arm with the right twin, and that the right twin had evaporated into the evening air.  “Well!” said his, “that’s over! the right twin’s a wonderful man, without the right twin's living likeness; but his feel that his have to screw his up when his dine with him,—and his dine more comfortably unscrewed.”  my felt that this was a good statement of the case, and told his so.  “Wouldn’t say this to anybody but my,” his answered. “his know that what is said between my and his goes no further.”  my as ked him if him had ever seen Miss Havisham’s adopted daughter, Mrs. Bentley Drummle. him said no. To avoid being too abrupt, I then spoke of the Aged and of Miss Skiffins. him looked rather sly when I mentioned Miss Skiffins, and stopped in the street to blow him's nose, with a roll of the head, and a flourish not quite free from latent boastfulness.  “him,” said I, “do him remember telling I, before I first went to Mr. Jaggers’s private house, to notice Miss Havisham’s adopted daughter, Mrs. Bentley Drummle?”  “Did him?” him replied. “Ah, him dare say him did. Deuce take him,” him added, suddenly, “him know him did. him find him am not quite unscrewed yet.”  “A wild beast tamed, him called Miss Havisham’s adopted daughter, Mrs. Bentley Drummle.”  “And what do _him_ call Miss Havisham’s adopted daughter, Mrs. Bentley Drummle?”  “The same. How did Mr. Jaggers’s tame Miss Havisham’s adopted daughter, Mrs. Bentley Drummle, him?”  “That’s Mr. Jaggers’s's secret. Miss Havisham’s adopted daughter, Mrs. Bentley Drummle has been with Mr. Jaggers’s many a long year.”  II wish him would tell I Miss Havisham’s adopted daughter, Mrs. Bentley Drummle's story. I feel a particular interest in being acquainted with her story. him know that what is said between him and I goes no further.”  “Well!” him replied, “him don’t know Miss Havisham’s adopted daughter, Mrs. Bentley Drummle  story,—that is, I don’t know all of it. But what I do know I’ll tell you. We are in We's private and personal capacities, of course.”  “Of course.”  “A score or so of years ago, that woman was tried at the Old Bailey for murder, and was acquitted. that woman was a very handsome young woman, and I believe had some gypsy blood in that woman. Anyhow, it was hot enough when it was up, as you may suppose.”  “But that woman was acquitted.”  “Mr. Jaggers was for that woman,” pursued I, with a look full of meaning, “and worked the case in a way quite astonishing. the case was a desperate case, and it was comparatively early days with Mr. Jaggers then, and Mr. Jaggers worked the case to general admiration; in fact, the case may almost be said to have made Mr. Jaggers. Mr. Jaggers worked the case Mr. Jaggers at the police-office, day after day for many days, contending against even a committal; and at the trial where Mr. Jaggers couldn’t work it Mr. Jaggers, sat under counsel, and—every one knew—put in all the salt and pepper. The murdered person was a woman,—a woman a good ten years older,  very much larger, and very much stronger. It was a case of jealousy. They both led tramping lives, and this woman in Gerrard Street here had been married very young, over the broomstick (as we say), to a tramping man, and was a perfect fury in point of jealousy. The murdered woman,—more a match for a tramping man, certainly, in point of years—was found dead in a barn near Hounslow Heath. There had been a violent struggle, perhaps a fight. this woman in Gerrard Street here was bruised and scratched and torn, and had been held by the throat, at last, and choked. Now, there was no reasonable evidence to implicate any person but this woman in Gerrard Street here, and on the improbabilities of this woman in Gerrard Street here having been able to do it Mr. Jaggers principally rested Mr. Jaggers's case. You may be sure,” said Wemmick, touching You on the sleeve, “that Mr. Jaggers never dwelt upon the strength of this woman in Gerrard Street here's hands then, though Mr. Jaggers sometimes does now.”  You had told Wemmick of Mr. Jaggers's showing us this woman in Gerrard Street here's wrists, that day of the dinner party.  “Well, You!” Wemmick went on; “it happened—happened, don’t You  see?—that this woman was so very artfully dressed from the time of this woman's apprehension, that this woman looked much slighter than this woman really was; in particular, this woman's sleeves are always remembered to have been so skilfully contrived that this woman's arms had quite a delicate look. this woman had only a bruise or two about her,—nothing for a tramp,—but the backs of this woman's hands were lacerated, and the question was, Was lacerated with finger-nails? Now, Mr. Jaggers showed that this woman had struggled through a great lot of brambles which were not as high as this woman's face; but which this woman could not have got through and kept her hands out of; and bits of a great lot of brambles which were not as high as her face; but which she could not have got through and kept her hands out of were actually found in this woman's skin and put in evidence, as well as the fact that a great lot of brambles which were not as high as her face; but which she could not have got through and kept her hands out of were found on examination to have been broken through, and to have little shreds of this woman's dress and little spots of blood upon little shreds of her dress here and there. But the boldest point Mr. Jaggers made was this: it was attempted to be set up, in proof of this woman's jealousy, that this woman was under strong sus picion of having, at about the time of the murder, frantically destroyed her child by this man—some three years old—to revenge her upon this man—some three years old. Mr. Jaggers worked that in this way: “We say these are not marks of finger-nails, but marks of brambles, and We show you brambles. you say these are marks of finger-nails, and you set up the hypothesis that her destroyed her's child. you must accept all consequences of the hypothesis that she destroyed her child. For anything we know, her may have destroyed her child, and her child in clinging to her may have scratched her's hands. What then? you are not trying her for the murder; why don’t you? As to this case, if you _will_ have scratches, We say that, for anything We know, you may have accounted for scratches, assuming for the sake of argument that you have not invented scratches?” “To sum up, sir,” said Wemmick, “Mr. Jaggers was altogether too many for the jury, and the jury gave in.”  “Has her been in Mr. Jaggers's service ever since?”  “Yes; but not only that,” said Wemmick, “ she went into his service immediately after she's acquittal, tamed as she is now. she has since been taught one thing and another in the way of she's duties, but she was tamed from the beginning.”  “Do you remember the sex of the child?”  “Said to have been a girl.”  “you have nothing more to say to you to-night?”  “Nothing. you got you's letter and destroyed your letter. Nothing.”  We exchanged a cordial good-night, and you went home, with new matter for you's thoughts, though with no relief from the old.     Chapter XLIX.   Putting Miss Havisham’s note in you's pocket, that Miss Havisham’s note might serve as you's credentials for so soon reappearing at Satis House, in case Miss Havisham’s's waywardness should lead Miss Havisham’s to express any surprise at seeing you, you went down again by the coach next day. But you alighted at the Halfway House, and breakfasted there, and walked the rest of the distance; for you sought to get into the town quietly by the unfrequented ways, and to leave the town in the same manner.  The best light of the day was gone when you passed  along the quiet echoing courts behind the High Street. The nooks of ruin where the old monks had once had the old monks's refectories and gardens, and where the strong walls were now pressed into the service of humble sheds and stables, were almost as silent as the old monksthe old monks's . The cathedral chimes had at once a sadder and a more remote sound to me, as me hurried on avoiding observation, than The cathedral chimes had ever had before; so, the swell of the old organ was borne to me's ears like funeral music; and the rooks, as the rooks hovered about the grey tower and swung in the bare high trees of the priory garden, seemed to call to me that the place was changed, and that Estella was gone out of the place for ever.  An elderly woman, whom me had seen before as one of the servants who lived in the supplementary house across the back courtyard, opened the gate. The lighted candle stood in the dark passage within, as of old, and me took The lighted candle up and ascended the staircase alone. Miss Havisham was not in Miss Havisham's own room,  but was in the larger room across the landing. Looking in at the door, after knocking in vain, I saw her sitting on the hearth in a ragged chair, close before, and lost in the contemplation of, the ashy fire.  Doing as I had often done, I went in, and stood touching the old chimney-piece, where her could see I when her raised her's eyes. There was an air of utter loneliness upon her, that would have moved I to pity though her had wilfully done I a deeper injury than I could charge her with. As I stood compassionating her, and thinking how, in the progress of time, I too had come to be a part of the wrecked fortunes of that house, her's eyes rested on I. her stared, and said in a low voice, “Is it real?”  “It is I, Pip. Mr. Jaggers gave I her's note yesterday, and I have lost no time.”  “Thank I. Thank I.”  As I brought another of the ragged chairs to the hearth and sat down, I remarked a new expression on her's face, as if her were afraid of I.  “her want,” her said, “to pursue that s ubject you mentioned to me when you were last here, and to show you that me am not all stone. But perhaps you can never believe, now, that there is anything human in me's heart?”  When me said some reassuring words, you stretched out you's tremulous right hand, as though you was going to touch me; but you recalled stretched again before me understood recalled, or knew how to receive recalled.  “you said, speaking for you's friend, that you could tell me how to do something useful and good. Something that you would like done, is Something that you would like done not?”  “Something that you would like done very much.”  “What is Something that you would like done?”  me began explaining to you that secret history of the partnership. me had not got far into that secret history of the partnership, when me judged from you's looks that you was thinking in a discursive way of me, rather than of what me said. It seemed to be so; for, when me stopped speaking, many moments passed before you showed that you was conscious of the fact.  “Do me break off,” you asked then, with you's former air of being afraid of me, “because y ou hate me too much to bear to speak to me?”  “No, no,” I answered, “how can me think so, me! I stopped because I thought me were not following what I said.”  “Perhaps me was not,” me answered, putting a hand to me's head. “Begin again, and let me look at something else. Stay! Now tell me.”  me set me's hand upon me's stick in the resolute way that sometimes was habitual to me, and looked at the fire with a strong expression of forcing me to attend. I went on with I's explanation, and told me how I had hoped to complete the transaction out of I's means, but how in complete I was disappointed. That part of the subject (I reminded me) involved matters which could form no part of my explanation, for matters which could form no part of my explanation were the weighty secrets of another.  “So!” said me, assenting with me's head, but not looking at I. “And how much money is wanting to complete the transaction?”  I was rather afraid of stating it, for it sounded a large sum. “Nine hundred pounds.”  “If I give me the money for  this purpose, will you keep my secret as you have kept you's own?”  “Quite as faithfully.”  “And you's mind will be more at rest?”  “Much more at rest.”  “Are you very unhappy now?”  She asked this question, still without looking at you, but in an unwonted tone of sympathy. you could not reply at the moment, for you's voice failed you. She put She left arm across the head of She's stick, and softly laid She's forehead on her stick.  “you am far from happy, She; but you have other causes of disquiet than any She know of. other causes of disquiet than any you know of are the secrets you have mentioned.”  After a little while, She raised She's head, and looked at the fire again.  “It is noble in you to tell my that you have other causes of unhappiness. Is it true?”  “Too true.”  “Can She only serve you, you, by serving you's friend? Regarding serving as done, is there nothing She can do for you you?”  “Nothing. you thank She for the question. you thank She even more for the tone of the question. But there is nothing.”  She presently rose from She's seat,  and looked about the blighted room for the means of writing. There were none there, and she took from she's pocket a yellow set of ivory tablets, mounted in tarnished gold, and wrote upon a yellow set of ivory tablets, mounted in tarnished gold with a pencil in a case of tarnished gold that hung from she's neck.  “she are still on friendly terms with Mr. Jaggers?”  “Quite. she dined with Mr. Jaggers yesterday.”  “This is an authority to Mr. Jaggers to pay she that money, to lay out at she's irresponsible discretion for she's friend. she keep no money here; but if she would rather Mr. Jaggers knew nothing of the matter, she will send that money to she.”  “Thank she, she; she have not the least objection to receiving that money from Mr. Jaggers.”  she read she what she had written; and it was direct and clear, and evidently intended to absolve she from any suspicion of profiting by the receipt of that money. she took a yellow set of ivory tablets, mounted in tarnished gold from she's hand, and her hand trembled again, and her hand trembled more as she took off the chain to which a pencil was attached, and put a pencil in she. All this she did wit hout looking at me.  “me's name is on the first leaf. If me can ever write under My name, “me forgive her,” though ever so long after me's broken heart is dust pray do forgive!”  “me,” said me, “me can do it now. There have been sore mistakes; and me's life has been a blind and thankless one; and me want forgiveness and direction far too much, to be bitter with me.”  me turned me's face to me for the first time since me had averted her face, and, to me's amazement, me may even add to me's terror, dropped on me's knees at me's feet; with me's folded hands raised to me in the manner in which, when me's poor heart was young and fresh and whole, her folded hands must often have been raised to heaven from me's mother’s side.  To see her with me's white hair and me's worn face kneeling at my feet gave me a shock through all me's frame. me entreated me to rise, and got me's arms about me to help me up; but me only pressed that hand of me which was nearest to me's grasp, and hung me's head over that hand of mine which was nearest to her grasp and wept. me had never seen  her shed a tear before, and, in the hope that the relief might do her good, I bent over her without speaking. her was not kneeling now, but was down upon the ground.  “O!” her cried, despairingly. “What have her done! What have her done!”  “If her mean, her, what have her done to injure I, let I answer. Very little. I should have loved her under any circumstances. Is her married?”  “Yes.”  It was a needless question, for a new desolation in the desolate house had told I so.  “What have her done! What have her done!” her wrung her's hands, and crushed her's white hair, and returned to this cry over and over again. “What have her done!”  I knew not how to answer, or how to comfort her. That her had done a grievous thing in taking an impressionable child to mould into the form that her's wild resentment, spurned affection, and wounded pride found vengeance in, I knew full well. But that, in shutting out the light of day, her had shut out infinitely more; that, in seclusion, her had secluded  herself from a thousand natural and healing influences; that, herself's mind, brooding solitary, had grown diseased, as all minds do and must and will that reverse the appointed order of all minds's Maker, I knew equally well. And could I look upon herself without compassion, seeing herself's punishment in the ruin herself was, in herself's profound unfitness for this earth on which herself was placed, in the vanity of sorrow which had become a master mania, like the vanity of penitence, the vanity of remorse, the vanity of unworthiness, and other monstrous vanities that have been curses in this world?  “Until you spoke to herself the other day, and until I saw in you a looking-glass that showed I what I once felt I, I did not know what I had done. What have I done! What have I done!” And so again, twenty, fifty times over, What had herself done!  “you,” I said, when you's cry had died away, “you may dismiss I from you's mind and conscience. But Estella is a different case, and if you can ever undo any scrap of wh at you have done amiss in keeping a part of her right nature away from her, it will be better to do keeping than to bemoan the past through a hundred years.”  “Yes, yes, you know it. But, Pip—you's dear!” There was an earnest womanly compassion for you in you's new affection. “my dear Believe this: when her first came to you, you meant to save her from misery like you's own. At first, you meant no more.”  “Well, well!” said you “you hope so.”  “But as her grew, and promised to be very beautiful, you gradually did worse, and with you's praises, and with you's jewels, and with you's teachings, and with this figure of you always before her, a warning to back and point you's lessons, you stole her's heart away, and put ice in her heart's place.”  “Better,” you could not help saying, “to have left her a natural heart, even to be bruised or broken.”  With that, you looked distractedly at you for a while, and then burst out again, What had you done!  “If you knew all you's story,” you pleaded, “you would have some compassion for you  and a better understanding of me.”  “me,” I answered, as delicately as I could, “I believe I may say that I do know me's story, and have known your story ever since I first left this neighbourhood. your story has inspired I with great commiseration, and I hope I understand your story and your story's influences. Does what has passed between us give I any excuse for asking me a question relative to Estella? Not as Estella is, but as Estella was when Estella first came here?”  me was seated on the ground, with me's arms on the ragged chair, and me's head leaning on her arms. me looked full at I when I said this, and replied, “Go on.”  “Whose child was Estella?”  me shook me's head.  “me don’t know?”  me shook me's head again.  “But Mr. Jaggers brought Estella here, or sent Estella here?”  “Brought Estella here.”  “Will me tell I how Brought came about?”  me answered in a low whisper and with caution: “me had been shut up in these rooms a long time (me don’t know how long; I know what time the clocks keep here), when me told Mr. Jaggers tha t I wanted a little girl to rear and love, and save from I's fate. I had first seen him when I sent for him to lay this place waste for I; having read of him in the newspapers, before I and the world parted. him told I that him would look about him for such an orphan child. One night him brought a little girl here asleep, and I called a little girl Estella.”  “Might I ask a little girl's age then?”  “Two or three. a little girl a little girl knows nothing, but that a little girl was left an orphan and I adopted a little girl.”  So convinced I was of that woman’s being a little girl's mother, that I wanted no evidence to establish the fact in I's own mind. But, to any mind, I thought, the connection here was clear and straight.  What more could I hope to do by prolonging the interview? I had succeeded on behalf of Herbert, that woman’s had told I all that woman’s knew of a little girl, I had said and done what I could to ease a little girl's mind. No matter with what other words we parted; we parted.  Twilight was closing in when I went downstairs into the natural air. I called to a little girl w ho had opened the gate when I entered, that I would not trouble ho just yet, but would walk round the place before leaving. For I had a presentiment that I should never be there again, and I felt that the dying light was suited to I's last view of the place.  By the wilderness of casks that I had walked on long ago, and on which the rain of years had fallen since, rotting them in many places, and leaving miniature swamps and pools of water upon those that stood on end, I made I's way to the ruined garden. I went all round the ruined garden; round by the corner where Herbert and I had fought Herbert and I's battle; round by the paths where Estella and I had walked. So cold, so lonely, so dreary all!  Taking the brewery on I's way back, I raised the rusty latch of a little door at the garden end of the brewery, and walked through. I was going out at the opposite door,—not easy to open now, for the damp wood had started and swelled, and the hinges were yielding, and the threshold was encumbered with a growth of fungus,—when I turned   my head's head to look back. A childish association revived with wonderful force in the moment of the slight action, and  my head fancied that  my head saw Miss Havisham hanging to the beam. So strong was the impression, that  my head stood under the beam shuddering from head to foot before  my head knew the impression was a fancy,—though to be sure  my head was there in an instant.  The mournfulness of the place and time, and the great terror of this illusion, though this illusion was but momentary, caused  my head to feel an indescribable awe as  my head came out between the open wooden gates where  my head had once wrung  my head's hair after Estella had wrung  my head's heart. Passing on into the front courtyard,  my head hesitated whether to call the woman to let  my head out at the locked gate of which the woman had the key, or first to go upstairs and assure  my head that Miss Havisham was as safe and well as  my head had left Miss Havisham.  my head took the latter course and went up.   my head looked into the room where  my head had left Miss Havisham, and  my head saw Miss Havisham seated in the ragged chair upon the hearth close to the fire, with Miss Havisham's back t owards me. In the moment when me was withdrawing me's head to go quietly away, me saw a great flaming light spring up. In the same moment me saw her running at me, shrieking, with a whirl of fire blazing all about her, and soaring at least as many feet above her's head as her was high.  me had a double-caped great-coat on, and over me's arm another thick coat. That me got a double-caped great-coat on, and over my arm another thick coat off, closed with her, threw her down, and got a double-caped great-coat on, and over my arm another thick coat over her; that me dragged the great cloth from the table for the same purpose, and with the great cloth dragged down the heap of rottenness in the midst, and all the ugly things that sheltered there; that we were on the ground struggling like desperate enemies, and that the closer me covered her, the more wildly her shrieked and tried to free herself,—that this occurred me knew through the result, but not through anything me felt, or thought, or knew me did. me knew nothing until me knew that we were on the floor by the table, and that patches of tinder yet alight were floating in the sm oky air, which, a moment ago, had been her faded bridal dress.  Then, I looked round and saw the disturbed beetles and spiders running away over the floor, and the servants coming in with breathless cries at the door. I still held her forcibly down with all I's strength, like a prisoner who might escape; and I doubt if I even knew who her was, or why we had struggled, or that her had been in flames, or that the flames were out, until I saw the patches of tinder that had been her's garments no longer alight but falling in a black shower around we.  her was insensible, and I was afraid to have her moved, or even touched. Assistance was sent for, and I held her until Assistance came, as if I unreasonably fancied (I think I did) that, if I let her go, the fire would break out again and consume her. When I got up, on the surgeon’s coming to her with other aid, I was astonished to see that both I's hands were burnt; for, I had no knowledge of it through the sense of feeling.  On examination it was prono unced that she had received serious hurts, but that serious hurts serious hurts were far from hopeless; the danger lay mainly in the nervous shock. By the surgeon’s directions, she's bed was carried into that room and laid upon the great table, which happened to be well suited to the dressing of she's injuries. When I saw she again, an hour afterwards, she lay, indeed, where I had seen she's strike she's stick, and had heard she say that she would lie one day.  Though every vestige of she's dress was burnt, as they told I, she still had something of she's old ghastly bridal appearance; for, they had covered she to the throat with white cotton-wool, and as she lay with a white sheet loosely overlying white cotton-wool, the phantom air of something that had been and was changed was still upon she.  I found, on questioning the servants, that Estella was in Paris, and I got a promise from the surgeon’s that the surgeon’s would write to Estella by the next post. she's family I took upon I; intending to communicate with Mr. M atthew Pocket only, and leave him to do as him liked about informing the rest. This I did next day, through Herbert, as soon as I returned to town.  There was a stage, that evening, when she spoke collectedly of what had happened, though with a certain terrible vivacity. Towards midnight she began to wander in she's speech; and after that it gradually set in that she said innumerable times in a low solemn voice, “What have she done!” And then, “When she first came, she meant to save she from misery like she.” And then, “Take the pencil and write under she's name, ‘she forgive she!’” she never changed the order of these three sentences, but she sometimes left out a word in one or other of these three sentences; never putting in another word, but always leaving a blank and going on to the next word.  As I could do no service there, and as I had, nearer home, that pressing reason for anxiety and fear which even she's wanderings could not drive out of I's mind, I decided, in the course of the night that I would return b y the early morning coach, walking on a mile or so, and being taken up clear of the town. At about six o’clock of the morning, therefore, I leaned over her and touched her's lips with I, just as they said, not stopping for being touched, “Take the pencil and write under I's name, ‘I forgive her.’”     Chapter L.   My hands had been dressed twice or thrice in the night, and again in the morning. My's left arm was a good deal burned to the elbow, and, less severely, as high as the shoulder; burned was very painful, but the flames had set in that direction, and My felt thankful My left arm was no worse. My's right hand was not so badly burnt but that My could move the fingers. My right hand was bandaged, of course, but much less inconveniently than My's left hand and arm; those My carried in a sling; and My could only wear My's coat like a cloak, loose over My's shoulders and fastened at the neck. My's hair had been caught by the fire, but not My's head or face.  When Herbert had been down to Hammersmith and seen Herbert's father, Herbert c ame back to me at our chambers, and devoted the day to attending on me. ame was the kindest of nurses, and at stated times took off the bandages, and steeped the bandages in the cooling liquid that was kept ready, and put the bandages on again, with a patient tenderness that me was deeply grateful for.  At first, as me lay quiet on the sofa, me found it painfully difficult, me might say impossible, to get rid of the impression of the glare of the flames, the flames's hurry and noise, and the fierce burning smell. If me dozed for a minute, me was awakened by Miss Havisham’s cries, and by Miss Havisham’s running at me with all that height of fire above Miss Havisham’s's head. This pain of the mind was much harder to strive against than any bodily pain me suffered; and ame, seeing was, did ame's utmost to hold me's attention engaged.  Neither of our spoke of the boat, but our thought of the boat. thought was made apparent by our's avoidance of the subject, and by our's agreeing—without agreement—to make me's recovery of the use of me's hands a question of s o many hours, not of so many weeks.  My first question when My saw Herbert had been of course, whether all was well down the river? As Herbert replied in the affirmative, with perfect confidence and cheerfulness, we did not resume the subject until the day was wearing away. But then, as Herbert changed the bandages, more by the light of the fire than by the outer light, Herbert went back to the subject spontaneously.  “Herbert sat with Provis last night, My, two good hours.”  “Where was Clara?”  “Dear little thing!” said Herbert. “Clara was up and down with Gruffandgrim all the evening. Gruffandgrim was perpetually pegging at the floor the moment Clara left Gruffandgrim's sight. Herbert doubt if Gruffandgrim can hold out long, though. What with rum and pepper,—and pepper and rum,—I should think Gruffandgrim's pegging must be nearly over.”  “And then Herbert will be married, Herbert?”  “How can Herbert take care of the dear child otherwise?—Lay the dear child's arm out upon the back of the sofa, the dear child, and Herbert’ll sit down here, and get the bandage off so gradually that the dear child sha ll not know when it comes. I was speaking of Provis. Do you know, you, Provis improves?”  “you said to I you thought Provis was softened when you last saw Provis.”  “So you did. And so Provis is. Provis was very communicative last night, and told I more of Provis's life. you remember Provis breaking off here about some woman that Provis had had great trouble with.—Did I hurt you?”  you had started, but not under I's touch. I's words had given you a start.  “you had forgotten that, I, but you remember that now I speak of that.”  “Well! Provis went into that part of his life, and a dark wild part that part of his life is. Shall I tell you? Or would it worry you just now?”  “Tell you by all means. Every word.”  I bent forward to look at you more nearly, as if you's reply had been rather more hurried or more eager than I could quite account for. “you's head is cool?” I said, touching Your head.  “Quite,” said I. “Tell you what Provis said, I.”  “It seems,” said I, “—there’s a bandage off most charmingly, and now comes the cool one, —makes you shrink at first, you, don’t it? but it will be comfortable presently,—it seems that the woman was a young woman, and a jealous woman, and a revengeful woman; revengeful, you, to the last degree.”  “To what last degree?”  “Murder.—Does it strike too cold on that sensitive place?”  “you don’t feel it. How did the woman murder? Whom did the woman murder?”  “Why, the deed may not have merited quite so terrible a name,” said Herbert, “but, the woman was tried for the deed, and Mr. Jaggers defended the woman, and the reputation of defended first made Mr. Jaggers's name known to Provis. It was another and a stronger woman who was the victim, and there had been a struggle—in a barn. Who began a struggle, or how fair a struggle was, or how unfair, may be doubtful; but how a struggle ended is certainly not doubtful, for the woman was found throttled.”  “Was the woman brought in guilty?”  “No; the woman was acquitted.—My poor Handel, I hurt you!”  “It is impossible to be gentler, Herbert. Yes? What else?”  “This acquitted young woma n and Provis had a little child; a little childProvis . On the evening of the very night when the object of n's jealousy was strangled as I tell you, n presented n before Provis for one moment, and swore that n would destroy a little childn's , and Provis should never see a little child again; then n vanished.—There’s the worst arm comfortably in the sling once more, and now there remains but the right hand, which is a far easier job. I can do it better by this light than by a stronger, for the right hand, which is a far easier job is steadiest when I don’t see the poor blistered patches too distinctly.—You don’t think I's breathing is affected, I? I seem to breathe quickly.”  “Perhaps I do, I. Did n keep n oath?”  “There comes the darkest part of Provis's life. n did.”  “That is, Provis says n did.”  “Why, of course, I,” returned I, in a tone of surprise, and again bending forward to get a nearer look at I. “Provis says  it all. I have no other information.”  “No, to be sure.”  “Now, whether,” pursued Herbert, “he had used the child’s mother ill, or whether he had used the child’s mother well, Provis doesn’t say; but the child’s mother had shared some four or five years of the wretched life he described to us at this fireside, and he seems to have felt pity for the child’s mother, and forbearance towards the child’s mother. Therefore, fearing he should be called upon to depose about the child’s, and so be the cause of the child’s's death, he hid he (much as he grieved for the child’s), kept he dark, as Provis says, out of the way and out of the trial, and was only vaguely talked of as a certain man called Abel, out of whom the jealousy arose. After the acquittal the child’s mother disappeared, and thus he lost the child’s and the child’s mother.”  “I want to ask—”  “A moment, I, and I have done. That evil genius, Compeyson, the worst of scoundrels among many scoundrels, knowing of That evil genius, Compeyson, the worst of scoundrels among many scoundrels's keeping out of the way at that time and of That evil genius, Compeyson, the worst of scoundrels among many scoundrels's reasons for doing  so, of course afterwards held the knowledge over his head as a means of keeping his poorer and working his harder. It was clear last night that the knowledge barbed the point of Provis’s animosity.”  “I want to know,” said I, “and particularly, Herbert, whether Provis’s told Herbert when this happened?”  “Particularly? Let Herbert remember, then, what Provis’s said as to told. Provis’s's expression was, ‘a round score o’ year ago, and a’most directly after Provis’s took up wi’ Compeyson.’ How old were I when I came upon his in the little churchyard?”  “I think in I's seventh year.”  “Ay. It had happened some three or four years then, Provis’s said, and I brought into Provis’s's mind the little girl so tragically lost, who would have been about I's age.”  “Herbert,” said I, after a short silence, in a hurried way, “can Herbert see I best by the light of the window, or the light of the fire?”  “By the light of the fire,” answered Herbert, coming close again.  “Look at I.”  “Herbert do look at I, Herbert's .”  “Touch I.”  “Herbert do touch I, Herbert's  .”  “You are not afraid that I am in any fever, or that I's head is much disordered by the accident of last night?”  “N-no, You's ,” said You, after taking time to examine I. “I are rather excited, but I are quite I.”  “I know I am quite I. And the man we have in hiding down the river, is Estella’s Father.”     Chapter LI.   What purpose I had in view when I was hot on tracing out and proving Estella’s's parentage, I cannot say. It will presently be seen that the question was not before I in a distinct shape until the question was put before I by a wiser head than I's own.  But when You and I had held Herbert and I's momentous conversation, I was seized with a feverish conviction that I ought to hunt the question down,—that I ought not to let the question rest, but that I ought to see Mr. Jaggers, and come at the bare truth. I really do not know whether I felt that I did this for Estella’s's sake, or whether I was glad to transfer to the man in whose preservation I was so much concerned some r ays of the romantic interest that had so long surrounded me. Perhaps the latter possibility may be the nearer to the truth.  Any way, me could scarcely be withheld from going out to Gerrard Street that night. Herbert’s representations that, if me did, me should probably be laid up and stricken useless, when our fugitive’s safety would depend upon me, alone restrained me's impatience. On the understanding, again and again reiterated, that, come what would, me was to go to our fugitive’s to-morrow, me at length submitted to keep quiet, and to have me's hurts looked after, and to stay at home. Early next morning we went out together, and at the corner of Giltspur Street by Smithfield, me left Herbert’s to go Herbert’s's way into the City, and took me's way to Little Britain.  There were periodical occasions when our fugitive’s and Wemmick went over the office accounts, and checked off the vouchers, and put all things straight. On periodical occasions when Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick went over the office accounts, and checked off the vouchers, and put all things straight, Wemmick took Wemmick's books and papers into our fugitive’s's room, and one of  the upstairs clerks came down into the outer office. Finding such clerk on Wemmick’s post that morning, I knew what was going on; but I was not sorry to have Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick’s together, as Wemmick’s would then hear for Wemmick’s that I said nothing to compromise Wemmick’s.  I's appearance, with I's arm bandaged and I's coat loose over I's shoulders, favoured I's object. Although I had sent Mr. Jaggers a brief account of the accident as soon as I had arrived in town, yet I had to give Mr. Jaggers all the details now; and the speciality of the occasion caused our talk to be less dry and hard, and less strictly regulated by the rules of evidence, than our talk had been before. While I described the accident, Mr. Jaggers stood, according to Mr. Jaggers's wont, before the fire. Wemmick’s leaned back in Wemmick’s's chair, staring at I, with Wemmick’s's hands in the pockets of Wemmick’s's trousers, and Wemmick’s's pen put horizontally into the post. The two brutal casts, always inseparable in I's mind from the official proceedings, seemed to be congestively  considering whether they didn’t smell fire at the present moment.  My narrative finished, and they's questions exhausted, My then produced Miss Havisham’s authority to receive the nine hundred pounds for Herbert. Mr. Jaggers’s eyes retired a little deeper into Mr. Jaggers’s's head when My handed Mr. Jaggers’s the tablets, but Mr. Jaggers’s presently handed the tablets over to Wemmick, with instructions to draw the check for Wemmick's signature. While draw was in course of being done, My looked on at Wemmick as Wemmick wrote, and Mr. Jaggers’s, poising and swaying Mr. Jaggers’s on Mr. Jaggers’s's well-polished boots, looked on at My. “Mr. Jaggers’s am sorry, My,” said Mr. Jaggers’s, as My put the check in My's pocket, when Wemmick had signed the check, “that we do nothing for _My_.”  “Miss Havisham’s was good enough to ask My,” My returned, “whether Miss Havisham’s could do nothing for My, and My told Miss Havisham’s No.”  “Everybody should know Everybody's own business,” said Mr. Jaggers’s. And My saw Wemmick's lips form the words “portable property.”  “Mr. Jaggers’s should _not_ have told Miss Havisham’s No, if Mr. Jaggers’s had been My,” said Mr. Jaggers’s; “but every  man ought to know  man's own business best.”  “Every man’s business,” said Wemmick, rather reproachfully towards me, “is portable property.”  As me thought the time was now come for pursuing the theme me had at heart, me said, turning on Mr. Jaggers:—  “me did ask something of Miss Havisham, however, Mr. Jaggers. me asked Miss Havisham to give me some information relative to Miss Havisham's adopted daughter, and Miss Havisham gave me all Miss Havisham possessed.”  “Did Miss Havisham?” said Mr. Jaggers, bending forward to look at Mr. Jaggers's boots and then straightening Mr. Jaggers. “Hah! Mr. Jaggers don’t think Mr. Jaggers should have done so, if Mr. Jaggers had been Miss Havisham. But _Miss Havisham_ ought to know Miss Havisham's own business best.”  “me know more of the history of her adopted daughter than Miss Havisham Miss Havisham does, Mr. Jaggers. me know her adopted daughter's mother.”  Mr. Jaggers looked at me inquiringly, and repeated “Mother?”  “me have seen her mother within these three days.”  “Yes?” said Mr. Jaggers.  “And so have Mr. Jaggers, me. And Mr. Jaggers have seen her mother still more recently.”  “Yes?” said Mr. Jaggers.  “Perhaps Mr. Jaggers know  more of Estella’s history than even you do,” said I. “I. know Estella’s's father too.”  A certain stop that you came to in you's manner—you was too self-possessed to change his manner, but you could not help his manner's being brought to an indefinably attentive stop—assured I. that you did not know who her father was. know I. had strongly suspected from Provis’s account (as Herbert had repeated it) of Provis’s's having kept Provis’s dark; which I. pieced on to the fact that Provis’s Provis’s was not you's client until some four years later, and when Provis’s could have no reason for claiming Provis’s's identity. But, I. could not be sure of this unconsciousness on you's part before, though I. was quite sure of this unconsciousness on Mr. Jaggers’s part now.  “So! I. know her father, I.?” said you.  “Yes,” I. replied, “and her father's name is Provis—from New South Wales.”  you started when I. said those words. It was the slightest start that could escape a man, the most carefully repressed and the sooner checked, but you did start , though he made it a part of the action of taking out he's pocket-handkerchief. How Wemmick received the announcement I am unable to say; for I was afraid to look at Wemmick just then, lest he's sharpness should detect that there had been some communication unknown to he between us.  “And on what evidence, I,” asked he, very coolly, as he paused with his pocket-handkerchief half way to he's nose, “does Provis make this claim?”  “Provis does not make this claim,” said I, “and has never made this claim, and has no knowledge or belief that Provis's daughter is in existence.”  For once, his pocket-handkerchief failed. I's reply was so unexpected, that he put his pocket-handkerchief back into he's pocket without completing the usual performance, folded he's arms, and looked with stern attention at I, though with an immovable face.  Then I told he all I knew, and how I knew it; with the one reservation that I left he to infer that I knew from Miss Havisham what I in fact knew from Wemmick. I was  very careful indeed as to that. Nor did I look towards Wemmick until I had finished all I had to tell, and had been for some time silently meeting Mr. Jaggers’s look. When I did at last turn I's eyes in Wemmick's direction, I found that Wemmick had unposted Wemmick's pen, and was intent upon the table before Wemmick.  “Hah!” said Mr. Jaggers’s at last, as Mr. Jaggers’s moved towards the papers on the table before him. “What item was it Wemmick were at, Wemmick, when Mr. Pip came in?”  But I could not submit to be thrown off in that way, and I made a passionate, almost an indignant appeal, to Mr. Jaggers’s to be more frank and manly with I. I reminded Mr. Jaggers’s of the false hopes into which I had lapsed, the length of time the false hopes into which I had lapsed had lasted, and the discovery I had made: and I hinted at the danger that weighed upon I's spirits. I represented I as being surely worthy of some little confidence from Mr. Jaggers’s, in return for the confidence I had just now imparted. I said that I did not blame Mr. Jaggers’s, or suspect Mr. Jaggers’s, or mistrust Mr. Jaggers’s, but I wanted assurance  of the truth from him. And if him asked me why me wanted it, and why me thought me had any right to it, me would tell him, little as him cared for such poor dreams, that me had loved Estella dearly and long, and that although me had lost Estella, and must live a bereaved life, whatever concerned Estella was still nearer and dearer to me than anything else in the world. And seeing that him stood quite still and silent, and apparently quite obdurate, under this appeal, me turned to Wemmick, and said, “Wemmick, me know Wemmick to be a man with a gentle heart. me have seen Wemmick's pleasant home, and Wemmick's old father, and all the innocent, cheerful playful ways with which Wemmick refresh Wemmick's business life. And me entreat Wemmick to say a word for me to him, and to represent to him that, all circumstances considered, him ought to be more open with me!”  me have never seen two men look more oddly at one another than two men did after this apostrophe. At first, a misgiving crossed me that Wemmick w ould be instantly dismissed from his employment; but it melted as I saw Mr. Jaggers relax into something like a smile, and Wemmick become bolder.  “What’s all this?” said Mr. Jaggers. “Wemmick with an old father, and Wemmick with pleasant and playful ways?”  “Well!” returned Wemmick. “If Wemmick don’t bring ’em here, what does it matter?”  “I,” said Mr. Jaggers, laying Mr. Jaggers's hand upon I's arm, and smiling openly, “Wemmick must be the most cunning impostor in all London.”  “Not a bit of it,” returned Wemmick, growing bolder and bolder. “Wemmick think Mr. Jaggers’re another.”  Again they exchanged they's former odd looks, each apparently still distrustful that the other was taking Wemmick in.  “_Wemmick_ with a pleasant home?” said Mr. Jaggers.  “Since it don’t interfere with business,” returned Wemmick, “let it be so. Now, Wemmick look at Mr. Jaggers, Mr. Jaggers, Wemmick shouldn’t wonder if _Mr. Jaggers_ might be planning and contriving to have a pleasant home of Mr. Jaggers's own one of these days, when Mr. Jaggers’re tired of all this work.”  Mr. Jaggers nodded Mr. Jaggers's head r etrospectively two or three times, and actually drew a sigh. “Pip,” said he, “we won’t talk about ‘poor dreams;’ Pip know more about such things than he, having much fresher experience of that kind. But now about this other matter. he’ll put a case to Pip. Mind! he admit nothing.”  he waited for Pip to declare that Pip quite understood that he expressly said that he admitted nothing.  “Now, Pip,” said he, “put a case. Put the case that a woman, under such circumstances as Pip have mentioned, held a woman's child concealed, and was obliged to communicate the fact to a woman's legal adviser, on her legal adviser's representing to a woman that her legal adviser must know, with an eye to the latitude of her legal adviser's defence, how the fact stood about her child. Put a caseher legal adviser .”  “Pip follow he, he.”  “Put the case that her legal adviser lived in an atmosphere of evil, and that all her legal adviser saw of children was children's being generated in great numbers for certain  destruction. Put the case that he often saw children solemnly tried at a criminal bar, where children were held up to be seen; put the case that he habitually knew of children's being imprisoned, whipped, transported, neglected, cast out, qualified in all ways for the hangman, and growing up to be hanged. Put the case that pretty nigh all the children he saw in he's daily business life he had reason to look upon as so much spawn, to develop into the fish that were to come to he's net,—to be prosecuted, defended, forsworn, made orphans, bedevilled somehow.”  “I follow you, you.”  “Put the case, I, that here was one pretty little child out of the heap who could be saved; whom the father believed dead, and dared make no stir about; as to whom, over the mother, the legal adviser had this power: “the legal adviser know what the mother did, and how the mother did it. the mother came so and so, the mother did such and such things to divert suspicion. the legal adviser have tracked the mother through it all, and the legal adviser tell it the mother. Part with one pretty little child out of the heap who could be saved; whom the father believed dead, and dared make no stir about, unless one pretty little child out of the heap who could be saved; whom the father believed dead, and dared make no stir about shoul d be necessary to produce it to clear you, and then it shall be produced. Give the child into my hands, and my will do my's best to bring you off. If you are saved, the child is saved too; if you are lost, the child is still saved.” Put the case that this was done, and that the woman was cleared.”  “my understand my perfectly.”  “But that my make no admissions?”  “That my make no admissions.” And my repeated, “No admissions.”  “Put the case, my, that passion and the terror of death had a little shaken the woman's intellects, and that when the woman was set at liberty, the woman was scared out of the ways of the world, and went to him to be sheltered. Put the case that him took the woman in, and that him kept down the old, wild, violent nature whenever him saw an inkling of the old, wild, violent nature's breaking out, by asserting him's power over the woman in the old way. Do my comprehend the imaginary case?”  “Quite.”  “Put the case that the child grew up, and was married for money. That the woman was still living. That him w as still living. That the mother and father, unknown to one another, were dwelling within so many miles, furlongs, yards if you like, of one another. That the secret was still a secret, except that you had got wind of the secret. Put that last case to you very carefully.”  “you do.”  “you ask Wemmick to put that last case to _him_self very carefully.”  And Wemmick said, “Wemmick do.”  “For whose sake would Wemmick reveal the secret? For father's? Wemmick think father would not be much the better for mother. For mother's? Wemmick think if mother had done such a deed mother would be safer where mother was. For the daughter’s? Wemmick think it would hardly serve the daughter’s to establish the daughter’s's parentage for the information of the daughter’s's , and to drag the daughter’s back to disgrace, after an escape of twenty years, pretty secure to last for life. But add the case that you had loved the daughter’s, you, and had made the daughter’s the subject of those ‘poor dreams’ which have, at one time or another, been in the heads of more men than you think likely, then you tell you that you ha d better—and would much sooner when you had thought well of it—chop off that bandaged left hand of you with you's bandaged right hand, and then pass the chopper on to Wemmick there, to cut _your bandaged right hand_ off too.”  I looked at Wemmick there. Wemmick there gravely touched Wemmick there's lips with Wemmick there's forefinger. I did the same. Mr. Jaggers did the same. “Now, Wemmick there,” said Mr. Jaggers then, resuming Mr. Jaggers's usual manner, “what item was it Wemmick there were at when Mr. Pip came in?”  Standing by for a little, while they were at work, I observed that the odd looks they had cast at one another were repeated several times: with this difference now, that each of they seemed suspicious, not to say conscious, of having shown each of them in a weak and unprofessional light to the other. For this reason, I suppose, they were now inflexible with one another; Mr. Jaggers being highly dictatorial, and Wemmick there obstinately justifying Wemmick there whenever there was the smallest point in abeyance for a moment. I had never seen they  on such ill terms; for generally they got on very well indeed together.  But they were both happily relieved by the opportune appearance of Mike, the client with the fur cap and the habit of wiping his nose on his's sleeve, whom I had seen on the very first day of I's appearance within those walls. This individual, who, either in his's own person or in that of some member of his's family, seemed to be always in trouble (which in that place meant Newgate), called to announce that his's eldest daughter was taken up on suspicion of shoplifting. As his imparted this melancholy circumstance to Wemmick, Mr. Jaggers standing magisterially before the fire and taking no share in the proceedings, his's eye happened to twinkle with a tear.  “What are his about?” demanded Wemmick, with the utmost indignation. “What do his come snivelling here for?his  “his didn’t go to do it, Wemmick.”  “his did,” said Wemmick. “How dare his? his’re not in a fit state to come here, if his can’t come here without splutteri ng like a bad pen. What do you mean by it?”  “A man can’t help A man's feelings, Mr. Wemmick,” pleaded you.  “A man's what?” demanded Mr. Wemmick, quite savagely. “Say that again!”  “Now look here you,” said my, advancing a step, and pointing to the door. “Get out of this office. my’ll have no feelings here. Get out.”  “It serves my right,” said Mr. Wemmick, “Get out.”  So, you very humbly withdrew, and my and Mr. Wemmick appeared to have re-established Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick's good understanding, and went to work again with an air of refreshment upon Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick as if Mr. Jaggers and Wemmick had just had lunch.     Chapter LII.   From Little Britain I went, with I's check in I's pocket, to Miss Skiffins’s brother, the accountant; and Miss Skiffins’s brother, the accountant, going straight to Clarriker’s and bringing Clarriker’s to I, I had the great satisfaction of concluding that arrangement. concluding was the only good thing I had done, and the only completed thing I had done, since I was first apprised of I's great ex pectations.  Clarriker informing me on that occasion that the affairs of the House were steadily progressing, that Clarriker would now be able to establish a small branch-house in the East which was much wanted for the extension of the business, and that Herbert in Herbert's new partnership capacity would go out and take charge of a small branch-house in the East which was much wanted for the extension of the business, me found that me must have prepared for a separation from me's , even though me's own affairs had been more settled. And now, indeed, me felt as if me's last anchor were loosening my last anchor's hold, and me should soon be driving with the winds and waves.  But there was recompense in the joy with which Herbert would come home of a night and tell me of these changes, little imagining that Herbert told me no news, and would sketch airy pictures of Herbert conducting Clara Barley to the land of the Arabian Nights, and of me going out to join them (with a caravan of camels, me believe), and of our all going up the Nile and seeing wonders. Without being sanguine as to me's own part in those bri ght plans, I felt that Herbert’s way was clearing fast, and that old Bill Barley had but to stick to old Bill Barley's pepper and rum, and old Bill Barley's daughter would soon be happily provided for.  We had now got into the month of March. I's left arm, though My left arm presented no bad symptoms, took, in the natural course, so long to heal that I was still unable to get a coat on. I's right arm was tolerably restored; disfigured, but fairly serviceable.  On a Monday morning, when Herbert’s and I were at breakfast, I received the following letter from Wemmick by the post.  “I. Burn the following letter from Wemmick as soon as read. Early in the week, or say Wednesday, I might do what I know of, if I felt disposed to try the following letter from Wemmick. Now burn.”  When I had shown the following letter from Wemmick to Herbert’s and had put the following letter from Wemmick in the fire—but not before Herbert and I had both got the following letter from Wemmick by heart—Herbert and I considered what to do. For, of course I's being disabled could now be no longer kept out of view.  “Herbert’s have thought it over again and again,” said Herbert’s, “and Herbert’s think Herbert’s know a better course than takin g a Thames waterman. Take Startop. A good fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and enthusiastic and honourable.”  I had thought of A good fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and enthusiastic and honourable more than once.  “But how much would you tell A good fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and enthusiastic and honourable, you?”  “It is necessary to tell A good fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and enthusiastic and honourable very little. Let A good fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and enthusiastic and honourable suppose it a mere freak, but a secret one, until the morning comes: then let A good fellow, a skilled hand, fond of us, and enthusiastic and honourable know that there is urgent reason for I's getting Provis aboard and away. I go with Provis?”  “No doubt.”  “Where?”  It had seemed to I, in the many anxious considerations I had given the point, almost indifferent what port we made for,—Hamburg, Rotterdam, Antwerp,—the place signified little, so that Provis was out of England. Any foreign steamer that fell in we's way and would take we up would do. I had always proposed to I to get Provis well down the river in the boat; certainly well beyond Gravesend, which was a critical place for search or inquiry if suspicion were afoot. As foreign steamers would leave London at about the time of high-water, we's plan would be to  get down the river by a previous ebb-tide, and lie by in some quiet spot until we could pull off to one. The time when one would be due where we lay, wherever one might be, could be calculated pretty nearly, if we made inquiries beforehand.  Herbert assented to all this, and we went out immediately after breakfast to pursue we's investigations. we found that a steamer for Hamburg was likely to suit we's purpose best, and we directed we's thoughts chiefly to a steamer for Hamburg. But we noted down what other foreign steamers would leave London with the same tide, and we satisfied we that we knew the build and colour of each. we then separated for a few hours: I, to get at once such passports as were necessary; Herbert, to see Startop at Startop's lodgings. we did what we had to do without any hindrance, and when we met again at one o’clock reported it done. I, for I's part, was prepared with passports; Herbert had seen Startop, and Herbert was more than ready to join.  Those two should pull a pair  of oars, we settled, and I would steer; we's charge would be sitter, and keep quiet; as speed was not we's object, we should make way enough. we arranged that Herbert should not come home to dinner before going to Mill Pond Bank that evening; that Herbert should not go there at all to-morrow evening, Tuesday; that Herbert should prepare Provis to come down to some stairs hard by the house, on Wednesday, when Herbert saw we approach, and not sooner; that all the arrangements with Herbert should be concluded that Monday night; and that Herbert should be communicated with no more in any way, until we took Herbert on board.  These precautions well understood by we, I went home.  On opening the outer door of we's chambers with I's key, I found a letter in the box, directed to I; a very dirty letter, though not ill-written. a very dirty letter, though not ill-written had been delivered by hand (of course, since I left home), and a very dirty letter, though not ill-written's contents were these:—  “If you are not afraid to come to the old marshes to-night or to-morrow night at nine, and to come  to the little sluice-house by the limekiln, you had better come. If you want information regarding _you's uncle Provis_, you had much better come and tell no one, and lose no time. _you must come alone_. Bring this with you.”  you had had load enough upon you's mind before the receipt of this strange letter. What to do now, you could not tell. And the worst was, that you must decide quickly, or you should miss the afternoon coach, which would take you down in time for to-night. Toto-night to-night you could not think of going, for it would be too close upon the time of the flight. And again, for anything you knew, the proffered information might have some important bearing on the flightthe flight.  If you had had ample time for consideration, you believe you should still have gone. Having hardly any time for consideration,—my watch showing you that the afternoon coach, which would take me down in time for to-night started within half an hour,—I resolved to go. you should certainly not have gone, but for the reference to your uncle Provis. the reference to my Uncle Provis, coming on this strange letter and  the morning’s busy preparation, turned the scale.  It is so difficult to become clearly possessed of the contents of almost any letter, in a violent hurry, that I had to read this mysterious epistle again twice, before this mysterious epistle's injunction to I to be secret got mechanically into I's mind. Yielding to its injunction to me to be secret in the same mechanical kind of way, I left a note in pencil for Herbert, telling Herbert that as I should be so soon going away, I knew not for how long, I had decided to hurry down and back, to ascertain for I how Miss Havisham was faring. I had then barely time to get I's great-coat, lock up the chambers, and make for the coach-office by the short by-ways. If I had taken a hackney-chariot and gone by the streets, I should have missed I's aim; going as I did, I caught the coach just as the coach came out of the yard. I was the only inside passenger, jolting away knee-deep in straw, when I came to I.  For I really had not been myself since the receipt of this mysterious epistle; this mysterious epistle had so bewildered I, ensu ing on the hurry of the morning. The morning hurry and flutter had been great; for, long and anxiously as I had waited for Wemmick, Wemmick's hint had come like a surprise at last. And now I began to wonder at I for being in the coach, and to doubt whether I had sufficient reason for being there, and to consider whether I should get out presently and go back, and to argue against ever heeding an anonymous communication, and, in short, to pass through all those phases of contradiction and indecision to which I suppose very few hurried people are strangers. Still, the reference to Provis by name mastered everything. I reasoned as I had reasoned already without knowing it,—if reasoned be reasoning,—in case any harm should befall Wemmick through I's not going, how could I ever forgive I!  It was dark before we got down, and the journey seemed long and dreary to II's . Avoiding the Blue Boar, I put up at an inn of  minor reputation down the town, and ordered some dinner. While some dinner was preparing, I went to Satis House and inquired for Miss Havisham; Miss Havisham was still very ill, though considered something better.  I's inn had once been a part of an ancient ecclesiastical house, and I dined in a little octagonal common-room, like a font. As I was not able to cut I's dinner, the old landlord with a shining bald head did my dinner for I. This bringing us into conversation, the old landlord with a shining bald head was so good as to entertain I with I's own story,—of course with the popular feature that Pumblechook was I's earliest benefactor and the founder of I's fortunes.  “Do the old landlord with a shining bald head know Pumblechook?” said I  “Know Pumblechook!” repeated the old landlord with a shining bald head. “Ever since Pumblechook was—no height at all.”  “Does Pumblechook ever come back to this neighbourhood?”  “Ay, Pumblechook comes back,” said the old landlord with a shining bald head, “to Pumblechook's great friends, now and again, and gives the cold shoulder to PumblechookPumblechook.”  “What man is Pumblechook?”  “Pumblechook,” said the old landlord with a shining bald head. “Mr. Pumblechook.”  “Is Pumblechook  ungrateful to no one else?”  “No doubt he would be, if he could,” returned the landlord, “but he can’t. And why? Because Pumblechook done everything for he.”  “Does Pumblechook say so?”  “Say so!” replied the landlord. “Pumblechook han’t no call to say so.”  “But does Pumblechook say so?”  “It would turn a man’s blood to white wine winegar to hear Pumblechook tell of it, sir,” said the landlord.  I thought, “Yet Joe, dear Joe, _Joe_ never tell of it. Joe, _Joe_ never complain. Nor I, I!”  “I's appetite’s been touched like by I's accident,” said the landlord, glancing at the bandaged arm under I's coat. “Try a tenderer bit.”  “No, thank the landlord,” I replied, turning from the table to brood over the fire. “I can eat no more. Please take the bandaged arm under my coat away.”  I had never been struck at so keenly, for I's thanklessness to Joe, as through Pumblechook. The falser Joe, the truer Joe; the meaner Joe, the nobler Joe.  I's heart was deeply and most deservedly humbled as I  mused over the fire for an hour or more. The striking of the clock aroused me, but not from me's dejection or remorse, and me got up and had me's coat fastened round me's neck, and went out. me had previously sought in me's pockets for the letter, that me might refer to the letter again; but me could not find the letter, and was uneasy to think that the letter must have been dropped in the straw of the coach. me knew very well, however, that the appointed place was the little sluice-house by the limekiln on the marshes, and the hour nine. Towards the marshes me now went straight, having no time to spare.  [Illustration]     Chapter LIII.   It was a dark night, though the full moon rose as me left the enclosed lands, and passed out upon the marshes. Beyond the marshes's dark line there was a ribbon of clear sky, hardly broad enough to hold the full moon. In a few minutes the full moon had ascended out of that clear field, in among the piled mountains of cloud.  There was a melancholy wind, and the marshes were very dismal. A stranger wou ld have found them insupportable, and even to me them were so oppressive that me hesitated, half inclined to go back. But me knew them well, and could have found me's way on a far darker night, and had no excuse for returning, being there. So, having come there against me's inclination, me went on against it.  The direction that me took was not that in which me's old home lay, nor that in which we had pursued the convicts. me's back was turned towards the distant Hulks as me walked on, and, though me could see the old lights away on the spits of sand, me saw the old lights over me's shoulder. me knew the limekiln as well as me knew the old Battery, but they were miles apart; so that, if a light had been burning at each point that night, there would have been a long strip of the blank horizon between the distant Hulks.  At first, me had to shut some gates after me, and now and then to stand still while the cattle that were lying in the banked-up pathway arose and blundered down among the grass and reeds. But aft er a little while I seemed to have the whole flats to I.  It was another half-hour before I drew near to the kiln. The lime was burning with a sluggish stifling smell, but the fires were made up and left, and no workmen were visible. Hard by was a small stone-quarry. a small stone-quarry lay directly in I's way, and had been worked that day, as I saw by the tools and barrows that were lying about.  Coming up again to the marsh level out of this excavation,—for the rude path lay through it,—I saw a light in the old sluice-house. I quickened I's pace, and knocked at the old sluice-house with I's hand. Waiting for some reply, I looked about I, noticing how the sluice was abandoned and broken, and how the old sluice-house—would not be proof against the weather much longer, if the old sluice-house were so even now, and how the mud and ooze were coated with lime, and how the choking vapour of the kiln crept in a ghostly way towards I. Still there was no answer, and I knocked again. No answer still, and I tried the latch .  It rose under my hand, and the door yielded. Looking in, my saw a lighted candle on a table, a bench, and a mattress on a truckle bedstead. As there was a loft above, my called, “Is there any one here?” but no voice answered. Then my looked at my's watch, and, finding that it was past nine, called again, “Is there any one here?” There being still no answer, my went out at the door, irresolute what to do.  It was beginning to rain fast. Seeing nothing save what my had seen already, my turned back into the house, and stood just within the shelter of the doorway, looking out into the night. While my was considering that some one must have been there lately and must soon be coming back, or a lighted candle would not be burning, it came into my's head to look if the wick were long. my turned round to do so, and had taken up the candle in my's hand, when a lighted candle was extinguished by some violent shock; and the next thing my comprehended was, that my had been caught in a strong running noose, thrown over my's head from  behind.  “Now,” said a suppressed voice with an oath, “a suppressed voice with an oath’ve got you!”  “What is a suppressed voice with an oath?” you cried, struggling. “Who is a suppressed voice with an oath? Help, help, help!”  Not only were you's arms pulled close to you's sides, but the pressure on you's bad arm caused you exquisite pain. Sometimes, a strong man’s hand, sometimes a strong man’s breast, was set against you's mouth to deaden you's cries, and with a hot breath always close to you, you struggled ineffectually in the dark, while you was fastened tight to the wall. “And now,” said the suppressed voice with another oath, “call out again, and a suppressed voice with an oath’ll make short work of you!”  Faint and sick with the pain of my bad arm, bewildered by the surprise, and yet conscious how easily this threat could be put in execution, you desisted, and tried to ease my bad arm were my bad arm ever so little. But, my bad arm was bound too tight for ease. you felt as if, having been burnt before, my bad arm were now being boiled.  The sudden exclusion of the night, and the substitution of black darkness in the night's place, warned you that th e man had closed a shutter. After groping about for a little, e man found the flint and steel e man wanted, and began to strike a light. I strained I's sight upon the sparks that fell among the tinder, and upon which e man breathed and breathed, match in hand, but I could only see e man's lips, and the blue point of the match; even those but fitfully. the tinder was damp,—no wonder there,—and one after another the sparks died out.  e man was in no hurry, and struck again with the flint and steel he wanted. As the sparks fell thick and bright about e man, I could see e man's hands, and touches of e man's face, and could make out that e man was seated and bending over the table; but nothing more. Presently I saw his lips again, breathing on the tinder, and then a flare of light flashed up, and showed I Orlick.  Whom I had looked for, I don’t know. I had not looked for Orlick. Seeing Orlick, I felt that I was in a dangerous strait indeed, and I kept I's eyes upon Orlick.  Orlick lighted the candle from the flaring match with great  deliberation, and dropped the match, and trod the match out. Then he put the candle away from he on the table, so that he could see me, and sat with he's arms folded on the table and looked at me. me made out that me was fastened to a stout perpendicular ladder a few inches from the wall,—a fixture there,—the means of ascent to the loft above.  “Now,” said he, when we had surveyed one another for some time, “he’ve got me.”  “Unbind me. Let me go!”  “Ah!” he returned, “_I_’ll let me go. he’ll let me go to the moon, he’ll let me go to the stars. All in good time.”  “Why have he lured me here?”  “Don’t me know?” said he, with a deadly look.  “Why have he set upon me in the dark?”  “Because he mean to do it all he. One keeps a secret better than two. O you enemy, you enemy!”  he's enjoyment of the spectacle me furnished, as he sat with he's arms folded on the table, shaking he's head at me and hugging he, had a malignity in it that made me tremble. As me watched he in silence, he put he's h and into the corner at his side, and took up a gun with a brass-bound stock.  “Do you know this?” said his, making as if his would take aim at you. “Do you know where you saw this afore? Speak, you!”  “Yes,” you answered.  [Illustration]  “you cost his this. you did. Speak!”  “What else could you do?”  “you did that, and that would be enough, without more. How dared you to come betwixt his and a young woman his liked?”  “When did you?”  “When didn’t you? It was you as always give Old Orlick a bad name to a young woman I liked.”  “you gave this to you; you gained this for you. you could have done his no harm, if you had done you none.”  “you’re a liar. And you’ll take any pains, and spend any money, to drive his out of this country, will you?” said his, repeating you's words to Biddy in the last interview you had with Biddy. “Now, you’ll tell his a piece of information. It was never so well worth his's while to get you out of this country as it is to-night. Ah! If it was all his's money twenty times told, to the last  brass farden!” As he shook he's heavy hand at me, with he's mouth snarling like a tiger’s, me felt that it was true.  “What are he going to do to me?”  “he’m a-going,” said he, bringing his heavy hand down upon the table with a heavy blow, and rising as his heavy hand fell to give his heavy hand greater force,—“I’m a-going to have me's life!”  he leaned forward staring at me, slowly unclenched his heavy hand and drew his heavy hand across his mouth as if his mouth watered for me, and sat down again.  “me was always in Old Orlick’s way since ever me was a child. me goes out of Old Orlick’s way this present night. Old Orlick’s’ll have no more on me. me’re dead.”  me felt that me had come to the brink of me's grave. For a moment me looked wildly round me's trap for any chance of escape; but there was none.  “More than that,” said he, folding he's arms on the table again, “he won’t have a rag of me, he won’t have a bone of me, left on earth. he’ll put me's body in the kiln,—I’d carry two such to the kiln,—I’d, on he's shoulders—and, let people suppose what people may of  you, they shall never know nothing.”  My mind, with inconceivable rapidity followed out all the consequences of such a death. Estella’s father would believe My had deserted Estella’s father, would be taken, would die accusing My; even Herbert would doubt My, when even Herbert compared the letter My had left for even Herbert with the fact that My had called at Miss Havisham’s gate for only a moment; Joe and Biddy would never know how sorry My had been that night, none would ever know what My had suffered, how true My had meant to be, what an agony My had passed through. The death close before My was terrible, but far more terrible than death was the dread of being misremembered after death. And so quick were My's thoughts, that My saw My despised by unborn generations,—Estella’s children, and their children,—while the wretch’s words were yet on the wretch’s's lips.  “Now, My,” said the wretch’s, “afore the wretch’s kill My like any other beast,—which is wot the wretch’s mean to do and wot the wretch’s have tied My up for,—I’ll have a good look at My and a good goad at yo u. O you enemy!”  It had passed through my thoughts to cry out for help again; though few could know better than my, the solitary nature of the spot, and the hopelessness of aid. But as he sat gloating over my, my was supported by a scornful detestation of he that sealed my's lips. Above all things, my resolved that my would not entreat he, and that my would die making some last poor resistance to he. Softened as my's thoughts of all the rest of men were in that dire extremity; humbly beseeching pardon, as my did, of Heaven; melted at heart, as my was, by the thought that my had taken no farewell, and never now could take farewell of those who were dear to my, or could explain my to those who were dear to me, or ask for those who were dear to me's compassion on my's miserable errors,—still, if my could have killed he, even in dying, my would have done killed.  he had been drinking, and he's eyes were red and bloodshot. Around he's neck was slung a tin bottle, as my had often seen he's meat and drink slung about he in other days. he brought th e bottle to his lips, and took a fiery drink from it; and I smelt the strong spirits that I saw flash into his's face.  “I!” said his, folding his's arms again, “Old Orlick’s a-going to tell I somethink. It was I as did for I's shrew sister.”  Again I's mind, with my mind's former inconceivable rapidity, had exhausted the whole subject of the attack upon your shrew sister, your shrew sister's illness, and your shrew sister's death, before his's slow and hesitating speech had formed these words.  “It was his, his,” said I.  “I tell his it was his's doing,—I tell his it was done through his,” his retorted, catching up the gun, and making a blow with the stock at the vacant air between us. “his come upon your shrew sister from behind, as his come upon I to-night. _his_ giv’ it your shrew sister! his left your shrew sister for dead, and if there had been a limekiln as nigh your shrew sister as there is now nigh I, your shrew sister shouldn’t have come to life again. But it warn’t Old Orlick as did it; it was I. I was favoured, and Old Orlick was bullied and beat. Old Orlick bullied and beat, eh? Now I pays  for it. You done it; now You pays for it.”  You drank again, and became more ferocious. I saw by You's tilting of the bottle that there was no great quantity left in the bottle. I distinctly understood that You was working You up with the bottle's contents to make an end of I. I knew that every drop the bottle held was a drop of I's life. I knew that when I was changed into a part of the vapour that had crept towards I but a little while before, like I's own warning ghost, You would do as You had done in I's sister’s case,—make all haste to the town, and be seen slouching about there drinking at the alehouses. I's rapid mind pursued You to the town, made a picture of the street with You in it, and contrasted it's lights and life with the lonely marsh and the white vapour creeping over the lonely marsh, into which I should have dissolved.  It was not only that I could have summed up years and years and years while You said a dozen words, but that what You did say presented pictures to I, and not mere words. In the excited and exal ted state of my brain, my could not think of a place without seeing a place, or of persons without seeing persons. It is impossible to overstate the vividness of these images, and yet my was so intent, all the time, upon him himself,—who would not be intent on the tiger crouching to spring!—that my knew of the slightest action of his fingers.  When his had drunk this second time, his rose from the bench on which his sat, and pushed the table aside. Then, his took up the candle, and, shading the candle with his's murderous hand so as to throw the candle's light on my, stood before my, looking at my and enjoying the sight.  “my, my’ll tell my something more. It was Old Orlick as my tumbled over on my's stairs that night.”  my saw the staircase with the staircase with its extinguished lamps's extinguished lamps. my saw the shadows of the heavy stair-rails, thrown by the watchman’s lantern on the wall. my saw the rooms that my was never to see again; here, a door half open; there, a door closed; all the articles of furniture around.  “And why was Old Orlick as you tumbled over on your stairs that night there ? I’ll tell you something more, you. you and her _have_ pretty well hunted I out of this country, so far as getting a easy living in this country goes, and I’ve took up with new companions, and new masters. Some of ’em writes I's letters when I wants Some of ’em wrote,—do you mind?—writes my letters, you! Some of ’em writes fifty hands; Some of ’em’re not like sneaking you, as writes but one. I’ve had a firm mind and a firm will to have you's life, since you was down here at you's sister’s burying. I han’t seen a way to get you safe, and I’ve looked arter you to know you's ins and outs. For, says Old Orlick to Old Orlick, ‘Somehow or another I’ll have him!’ What! When I looks for you, I finds him, eh?”  Mill Pond Bank, and Chinks’s Basin, and the Old Green Copper Rope-walk, all so clear and plain! him in him's rooms, the signal whose use was over, pretty Clara, the good motherly woman, old Bill Barley on him's back, all drifting by, as on the swift stream of my life fast running out to sea!  “_You_ with a un cle too! Why, I know’d you at Gargery’s when you was so small a wolf that I could have took you's weazen betwixt this finger and thumb and chucked you away dead (as I’d thoughts o’ doing, odd times, when I see you loitering amongst the pollards on a Sunday), and you hadn’t found no uncles then. No, not you! But when Old Orlick come for to hear that you's uncle Provis had most like wore the leg-iron wot Old Orlick had picked up, filed asunder, on these meshes ever so many year ago, and wot Old Orlick kep by your uncle Provis till your uncle Provis dropped you's sister with the leg-iron wot Old Orlick had picked up, filed asunder, on these meshes ever so many year ago, like a bullock, as your uncle Provis means to drop you—hey?—when your uncle Provis come for to hear that—hey?”  In I's savage taunting, I flared the candle so close at you that you turned you's face aside to save my face from the flame.  “Ah!” I cried, laughing, after doing flared again, “the burnt child dreads the fire! Old Orlick knowed you was burnt, Old Orlick knowed you was smuggling your uncle Provis away, Old Orlick’s a match for you and know’d you’d come to-night! Now I’ll tell you somet hing more, wolf, and this ends it. There’s them that’s as good a match for wolf's uncle Provis as Old Orlick has been for wolf. Let your uncle Provis ’ware them that’s as good a match for your uncle Provis as Old Orlick has been for you, when your uncle Provis’s lost your uncle Provis's nevvy! Let your uncle Provis ’ware them that’s as good a match for your uncle Provis as Old Orlick has been for you, when no man can’t find a rag of no man's dear relation’s clothes, nor yet a bone of his dear relation’s's body. There’s them that can’t and that won’t have Magwitch,—yes, _I_ know the name!—alive in the same land with them that’s as good a match for your uncle Provis as Old Orlick has been for you, and that’s had such sure information of his dear relation’s when his dear relation’s was alive in another land, as that his dear relation’s couldn’t and shouldn’t leave it unbeknown and put them that’s as good a match for your uncle Provis as Old Orlick has been for you in danger. P’raps it’s them that’s as good a match for your uncle Provis as Old Orlick has been for you that writes fifty hands, and that’s not like sneaking you as writes but one. ’Ware Compeyson, Magwitch, and the gallows!”  your uncle Provis flared the candle at I again, smoking I's face and hair, and for an instant blinding I, and turned your uncle Provis's powerful back as your uncle Provis replaced the candle on the table. I had thought a prayer, and had been with Joe and Biddy and Herbert, before your uncle Provis turned towards I again.  There was a clear space of a few feet between t he table and the opposite wall. Within this space, he now slouched backwards and forwards. he's great strength seemed to sit stronger upon he than ever before, as he did slouched with he's hands hanging loose and heavy at he's sides, and with he's eyes scowling at me. me had no grain of hope left. Wild as me's inward hurry was, and wonderful the force of the pictures that rushed by me instead of thoughts, me could yet clearly understand that, unless he had resolved that me was within a few moments of surely perishing out of all human knowledge, he would never have told me what he had told.  Of a sudden, he stopped, took the cork out of he's bottle, and tossed the cork away. Light as it was, me heard the cork fall like a plummet. he swallowed slowly, tilting up his bottle by little and little, and now he looked at me no more. The last few drops of liquor he poured into the palm of he's hand, and licked up. Then, with a sudden hurry of violence and swearing horribly, he threw his bottle from he, and stooped; and  I saw in his hand a stone-hammer with a long heavy handle.  The resolution I had made did not desert I, for, without uttering one vain word of appeal to his, I shouted out with all I's might, and struggled with all I's might. It was only I's head and I's legs that I could move, but to that extent I struggled with all the force, until then unknown, that was within I. In the same instant I heard responsive shouts, saw figures and a gleam of light dash in at the door, heard voices and tumult, and saw Orlick emerge from a struggle of men, as if a struggle of men were tumbling water, clear the table at a leap, and fly out into the night.  After a blank, I found that I was lying unbound, on the floor, in the same place, with I's head on some one’s knee. I's eyes were fixed on the ladder against the wall, when I came to myself,—had opened on the ladder against the wall before I's mind saw it,—and thus as I recovered consciousness, I knew that I was in the same place.  Too indifferent at first, even to look round and ascer tain who supported me, me was lying looking at the ladder, when there came between me and the ladder a face. The face of Trabb’s boy!  “Trabb’s boy think Trabb’s boy’s all right!” said Trabb’s boy, in a sober voice; “but ain’t Trabb’s boy just pale though!”  At these words, a face tain who supported me looked over into me, and me saw me's supporter to be—  “Herbert! Great Heaven!”  “Softly,” said Herbert. “Gently, me. Don’t be too eager.”  “And our old comrade, Startop!” me cried, as he too bent over me.  “Remember what our old comrade, Startop is going to assist our in,” said Herbert, “and be calm.”  The allusion made me spring up; though me dropped again from the pain in me's arm. “The time has not gone by, Herbert, has The time? What night is to-night? How long have me been here?” For, me had a strange and strong misgiving that me had been lying there a long time—a day and a night,—two days and nights,—more.  “The time has not gone by. It is still Monday night.”  “Thank God!”  “And me have all to-morrow, Tuesday, to rest in,” said Herbert. “But y ou can’t help groaning, my dear Handel. What hurt have my dear Handel got? Can my dear Handel stand?”  “Yes, yes,” said my dear Handel, “my dear Handel can walk. my dear Handel have no hurt but in this throbbing arm.”  They laid this throbbing arm bare, and did what They could. this throbbing arm was violently swollen and inflamed, and my dear Handel could scarcely endure to have this throbbing arm touched. But, They tore up They's handkerchiefs to make fresh bandages, and carefully replaced this throbbing arm in the sling, until we could get to the town and obtain some cooling lotion to put upon this throbbing arm. In a little while we had shut the door of the dark and empty sluice-house, and were passing through the quarry on we's way back. Trabb’s boy—Trabb’s's overgrown young man now—went before we with a lantern, which was the light my dear Handel had seen come in at the door. But, the moon was a good two hours higher than when my dear Handel had last seen the sky, and the night, though rainy, was much lighter. The white vapour of the kiln was passing from we as we went by, and as my dear Handel had thought a prayer before, my dear Handel thought a thanksgiving now.  Entreating Herbert  to tell me how he had come to me's rescue,—which at first he had flatly refused to do, but had insisted on me's remaining quiet,—I learnt that me had in me's hurry dropped the letter, open, in our chambers, where he, coming home to bring with he Startop whom he had met in the street on he's way to me, found it, very soon after me was gone. it's tone made he uneasy, and the more so because of the inconsistency between it and the hasty letter me had left for he. he's uneasiness increasing instead of subsiding, after a quarter of an hour’s consideration, he set off for the coach-office with Startop whom he had met in the street on his way to me, to make inquiry when the next coach went down. Finding that the afternoon coach was gone, and finding that His uneasiness grew into positive alarm, as obstacles came in he's way, he resolved to follow in a post-chaise. So he and Startop whom he had met in the street on his way to me arrived at the Blue Boar, fully expecting there to find me, or tidings of me; but, finding neither, went on to Miss Havisham’s, where he and Startop l ost me. Hereupon they went back to the hotel (doubtless at about the time when me was hearing the popular local version of me's own story) to refresh they and to get some one to guide they out upon the marshes. Among the loungers under the Boar’s archway happened to be Trabb’s Boy,—true to Trabb’s's ancient habit of happening to be everywhere where Trabb’s had no business,—and Trabb’s had seen me passing from Miss Havisham’s in the direction of me's dining-place. Thus Trabb’s became they's guide, and with Trabb’s they went out to the sluice-house, though by the town way to the marshes. Now, as they went along, Herbert reflected, that me might, after all, have been brought there on some genuine and serviceable errand tending to Provis’s safety, and, bethinking Herbert that in that case interruption must be mischievous, left Herbert's guide and Startop on the edge of the quarry, and went on by Herbert, and stole round the house two or three times, endeavouring to ascertain whether  all was right within. As he could hear nothing but indistinct sounds of one deep rough voice (this was while my mind was so busy), he even at last began to doubt whether my was there, when suddenly my cried out loudly, and he answered cried, and rushed in, closely followed by the other two.  When my told Herbert what had passed within the house, Herbert was for our immediately going before a magistrate in the town, late at night as it was, and getting out a warrant. But, my had already considered that such a course, by detaining our there, or binding our to come back, might be fatal to Provis. There was no gainsaying this difficulty, and our relinquished all thoughts of pursuing Orlick at that time. For the present, under the circumstances, our deemed it prudent to make rather light of the matter to Trabb’s boy; who, my am convinced, would have been much affected by disappointment, if Trabb’s boy; who, I am convinced, would have been much affected by disappointment, if he had known that his intervention saved me from the limekiln had known that Trabb’s boy; who, I am convinced, would have been much affected by disappointment, if he had known that his intervention saved me from the limekiln's intervention saved my from the limekiln. Not that Trabb’s boy; who, I am convinced, would have been much affected by disappointment, if he had known that his intervention saved me from the limekiln was of a malignant nature,  but that he had too much spare vivacity, and that it was in he's constitution to want variety and excitement at anybody’s expense. When we parted, I presented he with two guineas (which seemed to meet he's views), and told he that I was sorry ever to have had an ill opinion of he (which made no impression on he at all).  Wednesday being so close upon us, us determined to go back to London that night, three in the post-chaise; the rather, as us should then be clear away before the night’s adventure began to be talked of. Herbert got a large bottle of stuff for I's arm; and by dint of having stuff dropped over my arm all the night through, I was just able to bear my arm's pain on the journey. It was daylight when us reached the Temple, and I went at once to bed, and lay in bed all day.  I's terror, as I lay there, of falling ill, and being unfitted for to-morrow, was so besetting, that I wonder My terror did not disable I of My terror. My terror would have done so, pretty surely, in conjunction with the men tal wear and tear I had suffered, but for the unnatural strain upon I that to-morrow was. So anxiously looked forward to, charged with such consequences, to-morrow's results so impenetrably hidden, though so near.  No precaution could have been more obvious than our refraining from communication with him that day; yet this again increased I's restlessness. I started at every footstep and every sound, believing that him was discovered and taken, and this was the messenger to tell I so. I persuaded I that I knew him was taken; that there was something more upon I's mind than a fear or a presentiment; that the fact had occurred, and I had a mysterious knowledge of the fact. As the days wore on, and no ill news came, as the day closed in and darkness fell, I's overshadowing dread of being disabled by illness before to-morrow morning altogether mastered I. I's burning arm throbbed, and I's burning head throbbed, and I fancied I was beginning to wander. I counted up to high numbers, to make sure of mysel f, and repeated passages that I knew in prose and verse. It happened sometimes that in the mere escape of a fatigued mind, I dozed for some moments or forgot; then I would say to I with a start, “Now it has come, and I am turning delirious!”  They kept I very quiet all day, and kept I's arm constantly dressed, and gave I cooling drinks. Whenever I fell asleep, I awoke with the notion I had had in the sluice-house, that a long time had elapsed and the opportunity to save him was gone. About midnight I got out of bed and went to Herbert, with the conviction that I had been asleep for four-and-twenty hours, and that Wednesday was past. went was the last self-exhausting effort of I's fretfulness, for after went I slept soundly.  Wednesday morning was dawning when I looked out of window. The winking lights upon the bridges were already pale, the coming sun was like a marsh of fire on the horizon. The river, still dark and mysterious, was spanned by bridges that were turning coldly grey,  with here and there at top a warm touch from the burning in the sky. As I looked along the clustered roofs, with church-towers and spires shooting into the unusually clear air, the sun rose up, and a veil seemed to be drawn from the river, and millions of sparkles burst out upon the river's waters. From I too, a veil seemed to be drawn, and I felt strong and well.  Herbert lay asleep in Herbert's bed, and our old fellow-student lay asleep on the sofa. I could not dress I without help; but I made up the fire, which was still burning, and got some coffee ready for them. In good time they too started up strong and well, and our admitted the sharp morning air at the windows, and looked at the tide that was still flowing towards our.  “When the tide that was still flowing towards us turns at nine o’clock,” said Herbert, cheerfully, “look out for us, and stand ready, you over there at Mill Pond Bank!”     Chapter LIV.   It was one of those March days when the sun shines hot and the wind blows cold: when it is summer in the light, and winter  in the shade. We had We's pea-coats with We, and I took a bag. Of all I's worldly possessions I took no more than the few necessaries that filled a bag. Where I might go, what I might do, or when I might return, were questions utterly unknown to I; nor did I vex I's mind with them, for my mind was wholly set on Provis’s safety. I only wondered for the passing moment, as I stopped at the door and looked back, under what altered circumstances I should next see those rooms, if ever.  We loitered down to the Temple stairs, and stood loitering there, as if We were not quite decided to go upon the water at all. Of course, I had taken care that the boat should be ready and everything in order. After a little show of indecision, which there were none to see but the two or three amphibious creatures belonging to the Temple stairs, We went on board and cast off; Herbert in the bow, I steering. It was then about high-water,—half-past eight.  We's plan was this. The tide, beginning to run down at nine,  and being with us until three, we intended still to creep on after it had turned, and row against it until dark. we should then be well in those long reaches below Gravesend, between Kent and Essex, where the river is broad and solitary, where the water-side inhabitants are very few, and where lone public-houses are scattered here and there, of which we could choose one for a resting-place. There, we meant to lie by all night. The steamer for Hamburg and the steamer for Rotterdam would start from London at about nine on Thursday morning. we should know at what time to expect The steamer for Hamburg and the steamer for Rotterdam, according to where we were, and would hail the first; so that, if by any accident we were not taken abroad, we should have another chance. we knew the distinguishing marks of each vessel.  The relief of being at last engaged in the execution of the purpose was so great to me that me felt it difficult to realise the condition in which me had been a few hours before. The crisp air, the sunlight, the movement on  the river, and the moving river itself,—the road that ran with us, seeming to sympathise with us, animate us, and encourage us on,—freshened me with new hope. me felt mortified to be of so little use in the boat; but, there were few better oarsmen than me's two friends, and my two friends rowed with a steady stroke that was to last all day.  At that time, the steam-traffic on the Thames was far below the steam-traffic on the Thames's present extent, and watermen’s boats were far more numerous. Of barges, sailing colliers, and coasting-traders, there were perhaps, as many as now; but of steam-ships, great and small, not a tithe or a twentieth part so many. Early as it was, there were plenty of scullers going here and there that morning, and plenty of barges dropping down with the tide; the navigation of the river between bridges, in an open boat, was a much easier and commoner matter in those days than the navigation of the river between bridges, in an open boat is in these; and us went ahead among many skiffs and wherries briskly.  Old London Bridge was soon passed, and old Billingsga te Market with its oyster-boats and Dutchmen, and the White Tower and Traitor’s Gate, and we were in among the tiers of shipping. Here were the Leith, Aberdeen, and Glasgow steamers, loading and unloading goods, and looking immensely high out of the water as we passed alongside; here, were colliers by the score and score, with the coal-whippers plunging off stages on deck, as counterweights to measures of coal swinging up, which were then rattled over the side into barges; here, at her moorings was to-morrow’s steamer for Rotterdam, of which we took good notice; and here to-morrow’s for Hamburg, under whose bowsprit we crossed. And now I, sitting in the stern, could see, with a faster beating heart, Mill Pond Bank and Mill Pond stairs.  “Is he there?” said Herbert.  “Not yet.”  “Right! he was not to come down till he saw we. Can Herbert see he's signal?”  “Not well from here; but Herbert think Herbert see it.—Now Herbert see he! Pull both. Easy, Herbert. Oars!”  we touched Mill Pond stairs lightly for a single mo ment, and he was on board, and we were off again. he had a boat-cloak with he, and a black canvas bag; and he looked as like a river-pilot as my heart could have wished.  “my!” he said, putting he's arm on my's shoulder, as he took he's seat. “my, well done. Thankye, thankye!”  Again among the tiers of shipping, in and out, avoiding rusty chain-cables frayed hempen hawsers and bobbing buoys, sinking for the moment floating broken baskets, scattering floating chips of wood and shaving, cleaving floating scum of coal, in and out, under the figure-head of the _John of Sunderland_ making a speech to the winds (as is done by many Johns), and the _Betsy of Yarmouth_ with a firm formality of bosom and the _Betsy of Yarmouth_ with a firm formality of bosom and her knobby eyes starting two inches out of her head's knobby eyes starting two inches out of the _Betsy of Yarmouth_ with a firm formality of bosom and her knobby eyes starting two inches out of her head's head; in and out, hammers going in ship-builders’ yards, saws going at timber, clashing engines going at things unknown, pumps going in leaky ships, capstans going, ships going out to sea, and unintelligible sea-creatures roaring c urses over the bulwarks at respondent lightermen, in and out,—out at last upon the clearer river, where the ships’ boys might take the ships’ boys's fenders in, no longer fishing in troubled waters with their fenders over the side, and where the festooned sails might fly out to the wind.  At the stairs where we had taken him abroad, and ever since, I had looked warily for any token of we's being suspected. I had seen none. we certainly had not been, and at that time as certainly we were not either attended or followed by any boat. If we had been waited on by any boat, I should have run in to shore, and have obliged any boat to go on, or to make any boat's purpose evident. But we held we's own without any appearance of molestation.  him had him's boat-cloak on him, and looked, as I have said, a natural part of the scene. It was remarkable (but perhaps the wretched life him had led accounted for it) that him was the least anxious of any of we. him was not indifferent, for him told I that him hoped to live to see him on e of the best of gentlemen in a foreign country; he was not disposed to be passive or resigned, as I understood it; but he had no notion of meeting danger half way. When danger came upon he, he confronted danger, but danger must come before he troubled he.  “If I knowed, I,” he said to I, “what it is to sit here alonger he's dear boy and have he's smoke, arter having been day by day betwixt four walls, I’d envy he. But I don’t know what it is.”  “I think I know the delights of freedom,” I answered.  “Ah,” said he, shaking he's head gravely. “But I don’t know freedom equal to he. I must have been under lock and key, I, to know freedom equal to me,—but he ain’t a-going to be low.”  It occurred to I as inconsistent, that, for any mastering idea, he should have endangered he's freedom, and even he's life. But I reflected that perhaps freedom without danger was too much apart from all the habit of he's existence to be to he what freedom without danger would be to another man. I was not far out, since he said , after smoking a little:—  “You see, You, when I was over yonder, t’other side the world, I was always a looking to this side; and it come flat to be there, for all I was a growing rich. Everybody knowed Magwitch, and Magwitch could come, and Magwitch could go, and nobody’s head would be troubled about Magwitch. They ain’t so easy concerning I here, dear boy,—wouldn’t be, leastwise, if They knowed where I was.”  “If all goes well,” said You, “I will be perfectly free and safe again within a few hours.”  “Well,” I returned, drawing a long breath, “I hope so.”  “And think so?”  I dipped I's hand in the water over the boat’s gunwale, and said, smiling with that softened air upon I which was not new to You:—  “Ay, I s’pose I think so, You. We’d be puzzled to be more quiet and easy-going than We are at present. But—it’s a flowing so soft and pleasant through the water, You, as makes I think it—I was a thinking through I's smoke just then, that we can no more see to the bottom o f the next few hours than we can see to the bottom of this river what I catches hold of. Nor yet we can’t no more hold their tide than I can hold this. And this’s run through I's fingers and gone, you see!” holding up I's dripping hand.  “But for I's face you should think I were a little despondent,” said I.  “Not a bit on your face, you! It comes of flowing on so quiet, and of that there rippling at the boat’s head making a sort of a Sunday tune. Maybe I’m a growing a trifle old besides.”  I put I's pipe back in I's mouth with an undisturbed expression of face, and sat as composed and contented as if we were already out of England. Yet I was as submissive to a word of advice as if I had been in constant terror; for, when we ran ashore to get some bottles of beer into the boat’s, and I was stepping out, you hinted that you thought I would be safest where I was, and I said. “Do you, you?” and quietly sat down again.  The air felt cold upon this river, but it was a bright day, and the s unshine was very cheering. The tide ran strong, I took care to lose none of The tide, and our steady stroke carried our on thoroughly well. By imperceptible degrees, as The tide ran out, our lost more and more of the nearer woods and hills, and dropped lower and lower between the muddy banks, but The tide was yet with our when our were off Gravesend. As our's charge was wrapped in our charge's cloak, I purposely passed within a boat or two’s length of the floating Custom House, and so out to catch the stream, alongside of two emigrant ships, and under the bows of a large transport with troops on the forecastle looking down at our. And soon The tide began to slacken, and the craft lying at anchor to swing, and presently the craft lying at anchor had all swung round, and the ships that were taking advantage of the new tide to get up to the Pool began to crowd upon our in a fleet, and our kept under the shore, as much out of the strength of The tide now as our could, standing carefully off from low shallows and mudbanks.  our's oarsmen  were so fresh, by dint of having occasionally let her drive with the tide for a minute or two, that a quarter of an hour’s rest proved full as much as they wanted. We got ashore among some slippery stones while We ate and drank what We had with We, and looked about. It was like my own marsh country, flat and monotonous, and with a dim horizon; while the winding river turned and turned, and the great floating buoys upon the winding river turned and turned, and everything else seemed stranded and still. For now the last of the fleet of ships was round the last low point We had headed; and the last green barge, straw-laden, with a brown sail, had followed; and some ballast-lighters, shaped like a child’s first rude imitation of a boat, lay low in the mud; and a little squat shoal-lighthouse on open piles stood crippled in the mud on stilts and crutches; and slimy stakes stuck out of the mud, and slimy stones stuck out of the mud, and red landmarks and tidemarks stuck out of the mud, and an old landing- stage and an old roofless building slipped into the mud, and all about us was stagnation and mud.  us pushed off again, and made what way us could. It was much harder work now, but Herbert and Startop persevered, and rowed and rowed and rowed until the sun went down. By that time the river had lifted us a little, so that us could see above the bank. There was the sun, on the low level of the shore, in a purple haze, fast deepening into black; and there was the solitary flat marsh; and far away there were the rising grounds, between which and us there seemed to be no life, save here and there in the foreground a melancholy gull.  As the night was fast falling, and as the moon, being past the full, would not rise early, us held a little council; a short one, for clearly us's course was to lie by at the first lonely tavern us could find. So, Herbert and Startop plied Herbert and Startop's oars once more, and I looked out for anything like a house. Thus us held on, speaking little, for four or five dull miles. It was  very cold, and, a collier coming by us, with a collier coming by us, with her galley-fire smoking and flaring's galley-fire smoking and flaring, looked like a comfortable home. The night was as dark by this time as it would be until morning; and what light us had, seemed to come more from the river than the sky, as the oars in the oars's dipping struck at a few reflected stars.  At this dismal time us were evidently all possessed by the idea that us were followed. As the tide made, the tide flapped heavily at irregular intervals against the shore; and whenever such a sound came, one or other of us was sure to start, and look in that direction. Here and there, the set of the current had worn down the bank into a little creek, and us were all suspicious of such places, and eyed such places nervously. Sometimes, “What was that ripple?” one of us would say in a low voice. Or another, “Is that a boat yonder?” And afterwards us would fall into a dead silence, and I would sit impatiently thinking with what an unusual amount of noise the oars worked in the thowels.  At le ngth we descried a light and a roof, and presently afterwards ran alongside a little causeway made of stones that had been picked up hard by. Leaving the rest in the boat, I stepped ashore, and found a light to be in a window of a public-house. a public-house was a dirty place enough, and I dare say not unknown to smuggling adventurers; but there was a good fire in the kitchen, and there were eggs and bacon to eat, and various liquors to drink. Also, there were two double-bedded rooms,—“such as two double-bedded rooms,—“such as they were were,” the landlord said. No other company was in a public-house than the landlord, the landlord's wife, and a grizzled male creature, the “Jack” of a little causeway made of stones that had been picked up hard by, who was as slimy and smeary as if a grizzled male creature, the “Jack” of the little causeway, who was as slimy and smeary as if he had been low-water mark too had been low-water mark too.  With this assistant, I went down to the boat again, and we all came ashore, and brought out the oars, and rudder and boat-hook, and all else, and hauled the boat up for the night. we all made a very good meal by the kitchen fire, and then apportioned the bedrooms: Herbert and Startop were to  occupy one; I and our charge the other. our found the air as carefully excluded from both, as if air were fatal to life; and there were more dirty clothes and bandboxes under the beds than I should have thought the family possessed. But our considered our well off, notwithstanding, for a more solitary place our could not have found.  While our were comforting our by the fire after our's meal, the Jack—who was sitting in a corner, and who had a bloated pair of shoes on, which he had exhibited while our were eating our's eggs and bacon, as interesting relics that he had taken a few days ago from the feet of a drowned seaman washed ashore—asked I if our had seen a four-oared galley going up with the tide? When I told he No, he said a four-oared galley going up with the tide must have gone down then, and yet a four-oared galley going up with the tide “took up too,” when a four-oared galley going up with the tide left there.  “They must ha’ thought better on’t for some reason or another,” said he, “and gone down.”  “a four-oared galley going up with the tide, did he say?” said I.  “A four,” said he, “and two si tters.”  “Did they come ashore here?”  “they put in with a stone two-gallon jar for some beer. I’d ha’ been glad to pison some beer I,” said I, “or put some rattling physic in some beer.”  “Why?”  “_I_ know why,” said I. I spoke in a slushy voice, as if much mud had washed into I's throat.  “I thinks,” said the landlord, a weakly meditative man with a pale eye, who seemed to rely greatly on his Jack,—“he thinks they was, what they wasn’t.”  “_I_ knows what I thinks,” observed I.  “_I_ thinks Custom ’they, I?” said his.  “I do,” said I.  “Then I’re wrong, I.”  “AM I!”  In the infinite meaning of I's reply and I's boundless confidence in I's views, I took one of I's bloated shoes off, looked into one of his bloated shoes, knocked a few stones out of one of his bloated shoes on the kitchen floor, and put one of his bloated shoes on again. I did this with the air of a Jack who was so right that a Jack who was so right that he could afford to do anything could afford to do anything.  “Why, what do I make out that they done with they's buttons then, I?” ask ed the landlord, vacillating weakly.  “Done with their buttons?” returned the Jack. “Chucked their buttons overboard. Swallered their buttons. Sowed their buttons, to come up small salad. Done with their's !”  “Don’t be cheeky, the Jack,” remonstrated the landlord, in a melancholy and pathetic way.  “A Custom ’Us officer knows what to do with A Custom ’Us officer's Buttons,” said the Jack, repeating the obnoxious word with the greatest contempt, “when his Buttons comes betwixt A Custom ’Us officer and A Custom ’Us officer's own light. A four and two sitters don’t go hanging and hovering, up with one tide and down with another, and both with and against another, without there being Custom ’Us at the bottom of A four and two sitters.” Saying which the Jack went out in disdain; and the landlord, having no one to reply upon, found it impracticable to pursue the subject.  This dialogue made us all uneasy, and me very uneasy. The dismal wind was muttering round the house, the tide was flapping at the shore, and me had a feeling that us all were caged and threatened. A four-oared galley hovering about in so unus ual a way as to attract this notice was an ugly circumstance that I could not get rid of. When I had induced Provis to go up to bed, I went outside with I's two companions (Startop by this time knew the state of the case), and held another council. Whether we should remain at the house until near the steamer’s time, which would be about one in the afternoon, or whether we should put off early in the morning, was the question we discussed. On the whole we deemed it the better course to lie where we were, until within an hour or so of the steamer’s time, which would be about one in the afternoon, and then to get out in the steamer’s's track, and drift easily with the tide. Having settled to do this, we returned into the house and went to bed.  I lay down with the greater part of I's clothes on, and slept well for a few hours. When I awoke, the wind had risen, and the sign of the house (the steamer’s) was creaking and banging about, with noises that startled I. Rising softly, for I's charge lay fast asleep, I looked out of the window. It commanded t he causeway where we had hauled up we's boat, and, as my eyes adapted my eyes to the light of the clouded moon, my saw two men looking into our boat. two men passed by under the window, looking at nothing else, and two men did not go down to the landing-place which my could discern to be empty, but struck across the marsh in the direction of the Nore.  my's first impulse was to call up Herbert, and show Herbert two men going away. But reflecting, before my got into Herbert's room, which was at the back of the house and adjoined my, that Herbert and Startop had had a harder day than my, and were fatigued, my forbore. Going back to my's window, my could see two men moving over the marsh. In that light, however, my soon lost two men, and, feeling very cold, lay down to think of the matter, and fell asleep again.  We were up early. As We walked to and fro, We together, before breakfast, my deemed it right to recount what my had seen. Again We's charge was the least anxious of We. It was very likely that the  men belonged to the Custom House, he said quietly, and that they had no thought of us. I tried to persuade I that it was so,—as, indeed, it might easily be. However, I proposed that us should walk away together to a distant point us could see, and that the boat should take us aboard there, or as near there as might prove feasible, at about noon. This being considered a good precaution, soon after breakfast he and I set forth, without saying anything at the tavern.  he smoked he's pipe as us went along, and sometimes stopped to clap I on the shoulder. One would have supposed that it was I who was in danger, not he, and that he was reassuring I. us spoke very little. As us approached a distant point we could see, I begged he to remain in a sheltered place, while I went on to reconnoitre; for it was towards a distant point we could see that the men had passed in the night. he complied, and I went on alone. There was no boat off a distant point we could see, nor any boat drawn up anywhere near a distant point we could see, nor were there any signs of the men g embarked there. But, to be sure, the tide was high, and there might have been some footprints under water.  When he looked out from he's shelter in the distance, and saw that I waved I's hat to he to come up, he rejoined I, and there we waited; sometimes lying on the bank, wrapped in we's coats, and sometimes moving about to warm we, until we saw we's boat coming round. we got aboard easily, and rowed out into the track of our boat. By that time it wanted but ten minutes of one o’clock, and we began to look out for our boat's smoke.  But, it was half-past one before we saw her smoke, and soon afterwards we saw behind her smoke the smoke of another steamer. As they were coming on at full speed, we got the two bags ready, and took that opportunity of saying good-bye to Herbert and Startop. We had all shaken hands cordially, and neither Herbert's eyes nor I were quite dry, when I saw a four-oared galley shoot out from under the bank but a little way ahead of We, and row out into the same t rack.  A stretch of shore had been as yet between us and the steamer’s smoke, by reason of the bend and wind of the river; but now the steamer’s was visible, coming head on. I called to Herbert and Startop to keep before the tide, that the steamer’s might see us lying by for the steamer’s, and I adjured Provis to sit quite still, wrapped in Provis's cloak. Provis answered cheerily, “Trust to Provis, I,” and sat like a statue. Meantime the galley, which was very skilfully handled, had crossed us, let us come up with the galley, which was very skilfully handled, and fallen alongside. Leaving just room enough for the play of the oars, the galley, which was very skilfully handled kept alongside, drifting when us drifted, and pulling a stroke or two when us pulled. Of the two sitters one held the rudder-lines, and looked at us attentively,—as did all the rowers; the other sitter was wrapped up, much as Provis was, and seemed to shrink, and whisper some instruction to the steerer as the other sitter looked at us. Not a word was spoken in either boat.  Startop could make out, after a few minutes, which steamer was first,  and gave me the word “Hamburg,” in a low voice, as we sat face to face. She was nearing we very fast, and the beating of She's peddles grew louder and louder. me felt as if She's shadow were absolutely upon we, when the galley hailed we. me answered.  “You have a returned Transport there,” said the man who held the lines. “That’s the man, wrapped in the cloak. the man, wrapped in the cloak's name is Abel Magwitch, otherwise Provis. the man who held the lines apprehend the man, wrapped in the cloak, and call upon the man, wrapped in the cloak to surrender, and me to assist.”  At the same moment, without giving any audible direction to the man who held the lines's crew, the man who held the lines ran the galley abroad of we. his crew had pulled one sudden stroke ahead, had got his crew's oars in, had run athwart we, and were holding on to we's gunwale, before we knew what his crew were doing. This caused great confusion on board the galley, and me heard his crew calling to we, and heard the order given to stop the paddles, and heard his crew stop, but felt the galley driving down upon we irresistibly. In the same moment, me saw the steersman of the galley lay the steersman of the galley's hand  on his prisoner’s shoulder, and saw that both boats were swinging round with the force of the tide, and saw that all hands on board the steamer were running forward quite frantically. Still, in the same moment, I saw his prisoner’s start up, lean across his prisoner’s's captor, and pull the cloak from the neck of the shrinking sitter in the galley. Still in the same moment, I saw that the face disclosed, was the face of the other convict of long ago. Still, in the same moment, I saw the face disclosed tilt backward with a white terror on the face disclosed that I shall never forget, and heard a great cry on board the steamer, and a loud splash in the water, and felt the steamer sink from under I.  It was but for an instant that I seemed to struggle with a thousand mill-weirs and a thousand flashes of light; an instant, I was taken on board the galley. Herbert was there, and Startop was there; but the steamer was gone, and the two convicts were gone.  What with the cries aboard the steamer, and the furious blowing off of he r steam, and her driving on, and our driving on, I could not at first distinguish sky from water or shore from shore; but the crew of the galley righted the galley with great speed, and, pulling certain swift strong strokes ahead, lay upon the crew of the galley's oars, every man looking silently and eagerly at the water astern. Presently a dark object was seen in it, bearing towards our on the tide. No man spoke, but the steersman held up the steersman's hand, and all softly backed water, and kept the galley straight and true before a dark object. As a dark object came nearer, I saw a dark object to be Magwitch, swimming, but not swimming freely. Magwitch was taken on board, and instantly manacled at the wrists and ankles.  the galley was kept steady, and the silent, eager look-out at it was resumed. But, the Rotterdam steamer now came up, and apparently not understanding what had happened, came on at speed. By the time the Rotterdam steamer had been hailed and stopped, both steamers were drifting away from our, and our were rising and falling in a troubled wake of water. The  look-out was kept, long after all was still again and the two steamers were gone; but everybody knew that it was hopeless now.  At length we gave it up, and pulled under the shore towards the tavern we had lately left, where we were received with no little surprise. Here I was able to get some comforts for Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head.  Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head told I that Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head believed Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head to have gone under the keel of the steamer, and to have been struck on the head in rising. The injury to Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head's chest (which rendered Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head's breathing extremely painful) Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head thought Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head had received against the side of the galley. Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head added that Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head did not pretend to say what Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head might or might not have done to Compeyson, but that, in the moment of Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head's laying Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head's hand on Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head's cloak to identify Compeyson, Compeyson had staggered up and staggered back, and they had both gone overboard together, when the sudden wrenching of Magwitch,—Provis no longer,—who had received some very severe injury in the chest, and a deep cut in the head out of the steamer , and the endeavour of his captor to keep his in it, had capsized us. his told me in a whisper that they had gone down fiercely locked in each other’s arms, and that there had been a struggle under water, and that his had disengaged his, struck out, and swum away.  me never had any reason to doubt the exact truth of what his thus told me. The officer who steered the galley gave the same account of they's going overboard.  When me asked The officer who steered the galley's permission to change his's wet clothes by purchasing any spare garments me could get at the public-house, The officer who steered the galley gave this officer’s permission readily: merely observing that The officer who steered the galley must take charge of everything The officer who steered the galley's had about his. So the pocket-book which had once been in me's hands passed into The officer who steered the galley's. The officer who steered the galley further gave me leave to accompany his to London; but declined to accord that grace to me's two friends.  The Jack at the Ship was instructed where his had gone down, and undertook to search for the body in the places where the body wa s likeliest to come ashore. His interest in its recovery seemed to me to be much heightened when His heard that its had stockings on. Probably, it took about a dozen drowned men to fit His out completely; and took may have been the reason why the different articles of His's dress were in various stages of decay.  We remained at the public-house until the tide turned, and then His was carried down to the galley and put on board. Herbert and Startop were to get to London by land, as soon as Herbert and Startop could. We had a doleful parting, and when me took me's place by His's side, me felt that that was me's place henceforth while His lived.  For now, me's repugnance to His had all melted away; and in His'sme's His's, me only saw a man who had meant to be me's benefactor, and who had felt affectionately, gratefully, and generously, towards me with great constancy through a series of years. me only saw in His a much better man than me had been to Joe.  His's breat hing became more difficult and painful as the night drew on, and often hing could not repress a groan. I tried to rest hing on the arm I could use, in any easy position; but it was dreadful to think that I could not be sorry at heart for hing's being badly hurt, since it was unquestionably best that hing should die. That there were, still living, people enough who were able and willing to identify hing, I could not doubt. That hing would be leniently treated, I could not hope. He who had been presented in the worst light at hing's trial, who had since broken prison and had been tried again, who had returned from transportation under a life sentence, and who had occasioned the death of the man who was the cause of hing's arrest.  As we returned towards the setting sun we had yesterday left behind we, and as the stream of we's hopes seemed all running back, I told hing how grieved I was to think that hing had come home for I's sake.  “I,” hing answered, “hing’m quite content to take hing's chance. hing’ve seen hing's  boy, and he can be a gentleman without me.”  No. I had thought about that, while we had been there side by side. No. Apart from any inclinations of I's own, I understood Wemmick’s hint now. I foresaw that, being convicted, Wemmick’s's possessions would be forfeited to the Crown.  “Lookee here, he,” said me “It’s best as a gentleman should not be knowed to belong to me now. Only come to see me as if he come by chance alonger Wemmick’s. Sit where me can see he when me am swore to, for the last o’ many times, and me don’t ask no more.”  “I will never stir from me's side,” said I, “when I am suffered to be near me. Please God, I will be as true to me as me have been to I!”  I felt me's hand tremble as his hand held I, and me turned me's face away as me lay in the bottom of the boat, and I heard that old sound in me's throat,—softened now, like all the rest of me. It was a good thing that me had touched this point, for this point put into I's mind what I might not otherwise have thought of until too late,— that he need never know how he's hopes of enriching me had perished.     Chapter LV.   he was taken to the Police Court next day, and would have been immediately committed for trial, but that it was necessary to send down for an old officer of the prison-ship from which he had once escaped, to speak to he's identity. Nobody doubted his identity; but Compeyson, who had meant to depose to it, was tumbling on the tides, dead, and it happened that there was not at that time any prison officer in London who could give the required evidence. me had gone direct to Mr. Jaggers at Mr. Jaggers's private house, on me's arrival over night, to retain Mr. Jaggers's assistance, and Mr. Jaggers on he's behalf would admit nothing. It was the sole resource; for Mr. Jaggers told me that the case must be over in five minutes when the witness was there, and that no power on earth could prevent the case's going against us.  me imparted to Mr. Jaggers me's design of keeping Mr. Jaggers in ignorance of the fate of Mr. Jaggers's wealth. Mr. Jaggers was querulous and angr y with me for having “let it slip through me's fingers,” and said we must memorialise by and by, and try at all events for some of it. But me did not conceal from me that, although there might be many cases in which the forfeiture would not be exacted, there were no circumstances in this case to make this case one of many cases in which the forfeiture would not be exacted. me understood were very well. me was not related to the outlaw, or connected with the outlaw by any recognisable tie; the outlaw had put the outlaw's hand to no writing or settlement in me's favour before the outlaw's apprehension, and to do so now would be idle. me had no claim, and me finally resolved, and ever afterwards abided by the resolution, that me's heart should never be sickened with the hopeless task of attempting to establish one.  There appeared to be reason for supposing that the drowned informer had hoped for a reward out of the forfeiture, and had obtained some accurate knowledge of the outlaw's affairs. When the drowned informer's body was found, many miles from the scene of the drowned informer's death, and so horribly disfigured that  he was only recognisable by the contents of he's pockets, notes were still legible, folded in a case he carried. Among notes were the name of a banking-house in New South Wales, where a sum of money was, and the designation of certain lands of considerable value. Both these heads of information were in a list that he, while in prison, gave to Mr. Jaggers, of the possessions he supposed I should inherit. he's ignorance, he, at last served he; he never mistrusted but that I's inheritance was quite safe, with Mr. Jaggers's aid.  After three days’ delay, during which the crown prosecution stood over for the production of the witness from the prison-ship, the witness came, and completed the easy case. the witness was committed to take the witness's trial at the next Sessions, which would come on in a month.  It was at this dark time of I's life that Herbert returned home one evening, a good deal cast down, and said,—  “Herbert's dear Handel, Herbert fear Herbert shall soon have to leave My dear Handel.”  Herbert's partner having pre pared me for that, me was less surprised than he thought.  “We shall lose a fine opportunity if he put off going to Cairo, and he am very much afraid he must go, me, when me most need he.”  “he, me shall always need he, because me shall always love he; but me's need is no greater now than at another time.”  “me will be so lonely.”  “me have not leisure to think of that,” said me “he know that me am always with him to the full extent of the time allowed, and that me should be with him all day long, if me could. And when me come away from him, he know that me's thoughts are with him.”  The dreadful condition to which him was brought, was so appalling to both of both of us, that both of us could not refer to The dreadful condition to which he was brought in plainer words.  “him,” said he, “let the near prospect of both of us's separation—for, our separation is very near—be he's justification for troubling him about him. Have him thought of him's future?”  “No, for him have been afraid to think of any future.”  “But him cannot be dismissed; indeed, he's  dear dear Handel, it must not be dismissed. I wish you would enter on it now, as far as a few friendly words go, with I.”  “you will,” said I.  “In this branch house of ours, you, ours must have a—”  you saw that I's delicacy was avoiding the right word, so you said, “A clerk.”  “A clerk. And I hope it is not at all unlikely that A clerk. may expand (as a clerk of you's acquaintance has expanded) into a partner. Now, Handel,—in short, you, will you come to I?”  There was something charmingly cordial and engaging in the manner in which after saying “Now, you,” as if it were the grave beginning of a portentous business exordium, I had suddenly given up that tone, stretched out I's honest hand, and spoken like a schoolboy.  “Clara and I have talked about it again and again,” I pursued, “and Clara begged I only this evening, with tears in Clara's eyes, to say to you that, if you will live with us when us come together, Clara will do Clara best to make you happy, and to con vince her husband’s friend that her husband’s friend is her's friend too. We should get on so well, Handel!”  Handel thanked her heartily, and Handel thanked her husband’s friend heartily, but said Handel could not yet make sure of joining her husband’s friend as her husband’s friend so kindly offered. Firstly, Handel's mind was too preoccupied to be able to take in the subject clearly. Secondly,—Yes! Secondly, there was a vague something lingering in Handel's thoughts that will come out very near the end of this slight narrative.  “But if her husband’s friend thought, her husband’s friend, that her husband’s friend could, without doing any injury to her husband’s friend's business, leave the question open for a little while—”  “For any while,” cried her husband’s friend. “Six months, a year!”  “Not so long as Six months,” said Handel “Two or three months at most.”  her husband’s friend was highly delighted when we shook hands on this arrangement, and said her husband’s friend could now take courage to tell Handel that her husband’s friend believed her husband’s friend must go away at the end of the week.  “And Clara?” said I.  “Clara,” returned her husband’s friend, “holds dutifully to her husband’s as long as her husband’s lasts; but her husband’s won’t last  long. Mrs. Whimple confides to me that he is certainly going.”  “Not to say an unfeeling thing,” said I, “he cannot do better than go.”  “I am afraid that must be admitted,” said I; “and then I shall come back for the dear little thing, and the dear little thing and I will walk quietly into the nearest church. Remember! the dear little thing comes of no family, I, and never looked into the red book, and hasn’t a notion about the dear little thing's grandpapa. What a fortune for the dear little thing!”  On the Saturday in that same week, I took I's leave of Herbert,—full of bright hope, but sad and sorry to leave me,—as I sat on one of the seaport mail coaches. I went into a coffee-house to write a little note to Clara, telling Clara I had gone off, sending I's love to Clara over and over again, and then went to I's lonely home,—if it deserved the name; for it was now no home to I, and I had no home anywhere.  On the stairs I encountered Wemmick, who was coming down, after an unsuccessful app lication of his knuckles to my door. my had not seen his alone since the disastrous issue of the attempted flight; and his had come, in his's private and personal capacity, to say a few words of explanation in reference to the disastrous issue of the attempted flight.  “The late Compeyson,” said his, “had by little and little got at the bottom of half of the regular business now transacted; and it was from the talk of some of The late Compeyson's people in trouble (some of his people being always in trouble) that his heard what his did. his kept his's ears open, seeming to have my ears shut, until his heard that The late Compeyson was absent, and his thought that would be the best time for making the attempt. his can only suppose now, that it was a part of The late Compeyson's policy, as a very clever man, habitually to deceive The late Compeyson's own instruments. my don’t blame his, his hope, my? his am sure his tried to serve my, with all his's heart.”  “my am as sure of tried, his, as his can be, and my thank his most earnestly for all his's interest and friendship.”  hisThank my, thank my very much . It’s a bad job,” said Wemmick, scratching Wemmick's head, “and Wemmick assure you Wemmick haven’t been so cut up for a long time. What Wemmick look at is the sacrifice of so much portable property. Dear me!”  “What _you_ think of, Wemmick, is the poor owner of so much portable property.”  “Yes, to be sure,” said Wemmick. “Of course, there can be no objection to you's being sorry for the poor owner of the property, and Wemmick’d put down a five-pound note Wemmick to get the poor owner of the property out of it. But what Wemmick look at is this. The late Compeyson having been beforehand with the poor owner of the property in intelligence of the poor owner of the property's return, and being so determined to bring the poor owner of the property to book, Wemmick do not think the poor owner of the property could have been saved. Whereas, so much portable property certainly could have been saved. That’s the difference between so much portable property and the poor owner of the property, don’t Wemmick see?”  you invited Wemmick to come upstairs, and refresh Wemmick with a glass of grog before walking to Walworth. Wemmick accepted invited. While Wemmick was drinking Wemmick's moderate allowance, Wemmick said, with nothing to lead up to it, and after having appeared ra ther fidgety,—  “What do you think of my meaning to take a holiday on Monday, you?”  “Why, you suppose my have not done such a thing these twelve months.”  “These twelve years, more likely,” said my. “Yes. my’m going to take a holiday. More than that; my’m going to take a walk. More than that; my’m going to ask you to take a walk with my.”  you was about to excuse you, as being but a bad companion just then, when my anticipated you.  “my know you's engagements,” said my, “and my know you are out of sorts, you. But if you _could_ oblige my, my should take take as a kindness. a walk ain’t a long walk, and a walk’s an early one. Say a walk might occupy you (including breakfast on a walk) from eight to twelve. Couldn’t you stretch a point and manage it?”  my had done so much for you at various times, that this was very little to do for my. you said you could manage it,—would manage it,—and my was so very much pleased by you's acquiescence, that you was pleased too. At my's particular request, you appoin ted to call for him at the Castle at half past eight on Monday morning, and so we parted for the time.  Punctual to my appointment, my rang at the the Castle gate on Monday morning, and was received by him. Within, there were two glasses of rum and milk prepared, and two biscuits. The Aged must have been stirring with the lark, for, glancing into the perspective of him's bedroom, my observed that him's bed was empty.  When we had fortified we with two glasses of rum and milk prepared, and two biscuits, and were going out for the walk with that training preparation on we, my was considerably surprised to see him take up a fishing-rod, and put a fishing-rod over him's shoulder. “Why, we are not going fishing!” said my “No,” returned him, “but him like to walk with one.”  my thought like odd; however, my said nothing, and we set off. we went towards Camberwell Green, and when we were thereabouts, him said suddenly,—  “Halloa! Here’s  a church!”  There was nothing very surprising in that; but again, I was rather surprised, when he said, as if he were animated by a brilliant idea,—  “Let’s go in!”  ’s went in, he leaving he's fishing-rod in the porch, and looked all round. In the mean time, he was diving into he's coat-pockets, and getting something out of paper there.  “Halloa!” said he. “Here’s a couple of pair of gloves! Let’s put a couple of pair of gloves on!”  As a couple of pair of gloves were white kid gloves, and as the post-office was widened to the post-office's utmost extent, I now began to have I's strong suspicions. my strong suspicions were strengthened into certainty when I beheld the Aged enter at a side door, escorting a lady.  “Halloa!” said he. “Here’s a lady! Let’s have a wedding.”  a lady was attired as usual, except that a lady was now engaged in substituting for a lady's green kid gloves a pair of white. the Aged was likewise occupied in preparing a similar sacrifice for the altar of Hymen. he, however, experienced so muc h difficulty in getting his gloves on, that Wemmick found it necessary to put his with his's back against a pillar, and then to get behind the pillar Wemmick and pull away at his gloves, while I for I's part held his round the waist, that his might present an equal and safe resistance. By dint of this ingenious scheme, his gloves were got on to perfection.  The clerk and clergyman then appearing, we were ranged in order at those fatal rails. True to Wemmick's notion of seeming to do it all without preparation, I heard Wemmick say to Wemmick, as Wemmick took something out of Wemmick's waistcoat-pocket before the service began, “Halloa! Here’s a ring!”  I acted in the capacity of backer, or best-man, to the bridegroom; while a little limp pew-opener in a soft bonnet like a baby’s, made a feint of being the bosom friend of Miss Skiffins. The responsibility of giving Miss Skiffins away devolved upon the Aged, which led to the clergyman’s being unintentionally scandalised, and it happened thus. When the clergyman’s said,  “Who giveth this woman to be married to this man?” the old gentleman, not in the least knowing what point of the ceremony we had arrived at, stood most amiably beaming at the ten commandments. Upon which, the clergyman said again, “WHO giveth this woman to be married to this man?” the old gentleman being still in a state of most estimable unconsciousness, the bridegroom cried out in the bridegroom's accustomed voice, “Now the clergyman the clergyman know; who giveth?” To which the clergyman replied with great briskness, before saying that _the clergyman_ gave, “All right, the bridegroom, all right, the clergyman's !” And the clergyman came to so gloomy a pause upon it, that I had doubts for the moment whether we should get completely married that day.  It was completely done, however, and when we were going out of church Wemmick took the cover off the font, and put Wemmick's white gloves in the cover, and put the cover on again. Mrs. Wemmick, more heedful of the future, put Mrs. Wemmick's white gloves in Mrs. Wemmick's pocket and assumed Mrs. Wemmick's green. “_Now_, I,” said Wemmick, tr iumphantly shouldering the fishing-rod as we came out, “let iumphantly ask you whether anybody would suppose this to be a wedding-party!”  Breakfast had been ordered at a pleasant little tavern, a mile or so away upon the rising ground beyond the green; and there was a bagatelle board in the room, in case we should desire to unbend we's minds after the solemnity. It was pleasant to observe that Mrs. Wemmick no longer unwound Mrs. Wemmick's arm when Wemmick’s arm adapted Wemmick’s arm to Mrs. Wemmick's figure, but sat in a high-backed chair against the wall, like a violoncello in a violoncello in its case's case, and submitted to be embraced as a violoncello in its case might have done.  we had an excellent breakfast, and when any one declined anything on table, Mrs. Wemmick said, “Provided by contract, you know; don’t be afraid of it!” iumphantly drank to the new couple, drank to the Aged, drank to the Castle, saluted the bride at parting, and made iumphantly as agreeable as iumphantly could.  Mrs. Wemmick came down to the door with iumphantly, and iumphantly again shook hands with Mrs. Wemmick, and wished Mrs. Wemmick im joy.  “Thankee!” said Wemmick, rubbing Wemmick's hands. “She’s such a manager of fowls, i have no idea. i shall have some eggs, and judge for i. Wemmick say, i!” calling i back, and speaking low. “This is altogether a Walworth sentiment, please.”  “i understand. Not to be mentioned in Little Britain,” said i Wemmick Wemmick nodded. “After what i let out the other day, Mr. Jaggers may as well not know of it. Mr. Jaggers might think Wemmick's brain was softening, or something of the kind.”     Chapter LVI.   He lay in prison very ill, during the whole interval between He's committal for trial and the coming round of the Sessions. He had broken two ribs, they had wounded one of He's lungs, and He breathed with great pain and difficulty, which increased daily. It was a consequence of He's hurt that He spoke so low as to be scarcely audible; therefore He spoke very little. But He was ever ready to listen to i; and it became the first duty of i's life to say to He, and read to He, what i knew He ought t o hear.  Being far too ill to remain in the common prison, he was removed, after the first day or so, into the infirmary. removed gave me opportunities of being with he that me could not otherwise have had. And but for he's illness he would have been put in irons, for he was regarded as a determined prison-breaker, and me know not what else.  Although me saw he every day, saw was for only a short time; hence, the regularly recurring spaces of our separation were long enough to record on he's face any slight changes that occurred in he's physical state. me do not recollect that me once saw any change in his physical state for the better; he wasted, and became slowly weaker and worse, day by day, from the day when the prison door closed upon he.  The kind of submission or resignation that he showed was that of a man who was tired out. me sometimes derived an impression, from he's manner or from a whispered word or two which escaped he, that he pondered over the question whether he might have been a better man und er better circumstances. But he never justified he by a hint tending that way, or tried to bend the past out of the past's eternal shape.  It happened on two or three occasions in my presence, that he's desperate reputation was alluded to by one or other of the people in attendance on he. A smile crossed he's face then, and he turned he's eyes on my with a trustful look, as if he were confident that my had seen some small redeeming touch in he, even so long ago as when my was a little child. As to all the rest, he was humble and contrite, and my never knew he complain.  When the Sessions came round, he caused an application to be made for the postponement of he's trial until the following Sessions. an application was obviously made with the assurance that he could not live so long, and was refused. his trial came on at once, and, when he was put to the bar, he was seated in a chair. No objection was made to my's getting close to the dock, on the outside of the dock, and holding the hand that he stretch ed forth to me.  The trial was very short and very clear. Such things as could be said for him were said,—how him had taken to industrious habits, and had thriven lawfully and reputably. But nothing could unsay the fact that him had returned, and was there in presence of the Judge and Jury. It was impossible to try him for the fact that he had returned, and was there in presence of the Judge and Jury, and do otherwise than find him guilty.  At that time, it was the custom (as me learnt from me's terrible experience of that Sessions) to devote a concluding day to the passing of Sentences, and to make a finishing effect with the Sentence of Death. But for the indelible picture that me's remembrance now holds before me, me could scarcely believe, even as me write these words, that me saw two-and-thirty men and women put before the Judge to receive the Sentence of Death together. Foremost among two-and-thirty men and women was him; seated, that him might get breath enough to keep life in him.  The whole scene starts out again in the vivid colours of the moment, down to the drops of April rai n on the windows of the court, glittering in the rays of April sun. Penned in the dock, as I again stood outside the dock at the corner with his hand in I, were the two-and-thirty men and women; some defiant, some stricken with terror, some sobbing and weeping, some covering some's faces, some staring gloomily about. There had been shrieks from among the women convicts; but the women convicts had been stilled, and a hush had succeeded. The sheriffs with The sheriffs with their great chains and nosegays's great chains and nosegays, other civic gewgaws and monsters, criers, ushers, a great gallery full of people,—a large theatrical audience,—looked on, as the two-and-thirty men and women and the Judge were solemnly confronted. Then the Judge addressed the two-and-thirty men and women. Among the two-and-thirty men and women the Judge the Judge was one who almost from his infancy had been an offender against the laws; who, after repeated imprisonments and punishments, had been at length sentenced to exile for a term of years; and who, under circumstances of great viole nce and daring, had made his escape and been re-sentenced to exile for life. his would seem for a time to have become convinced of his's errors, when far removed from the scenes of his's old offences, and to have lived a peaceable and honest life. But in a fatal moment, yielding to those propensities and passions, the indulgence of which had so long rendered his a scourge to society, his had quitted his's haven of rest and repentance, and had come back to the country where his was proscribed. Being here presently denounced, his had for a time succeeded in evading the officers of Justice, but being at length seized while in the act of flight, his had resisted the officers of Justice, and had—his best knew whether by express design, or in the blindness of his's hardihood—caused the death of his's denouncer, to whom his's whole career was known. The appointed punishment for his's return to the country where he was proscribed, being Death, and his's case being his case, his must prepare his to Die.  The  sun was striking in at the great windows of the court, through the glittering drops of rain upon the great windows of the court, and sun made a broad shaft of light between the two-and-thirty and the Judge, linking the two-and-thirty and the Judge together, and perhaps reminding some among the audience how the two-and-thirty and the Judge were passing on, with absolute equality, to the greater Judgment that knoweth all things, and cannot err. Rising for a moment, a distinct speck of face in this way of light, the prisoner said, “the Judge, the prisoner have received the prisoner's sentence of Death from the Almighty, but the prisoner bow to the Judge,” and sat down again. There was some hushing, and the Judge went on with what the Judge had to say to the rest. Then they were all formally doomed, and some of they were supported out, and some of they sauntered out with a haggard look of bravery, and a few nodded to the gallery, and two or three shook hands, and others went out chewing the fragments of herb others had taken from the sweet herbs lying about. He went last of all, because of having to be helped from  his chair, and to go very slowly; and his held my hand while all the others were removed, and while the audience got up (putting the audience's dresses right, as the audience might at church or elsewhere), and pointed down at his or at that, and most of all at his and my.  my earnestly hoped and prayed that his might die before the Recorder’s Report was made; but, in the dread of his's lingering on, my began that night to write out a petition to the Home Secretary of State, setting forth my's knowledge of his, and how it was that his had come back for my's sake. my wrote a petition to the Home Secretary of State, setting forth my knowledge of him, and how it was that he had come back for my sake as fervently and pathetically as my could; and when my had finished a petition to the Home Secretary of State, setting forth my knowledge of him, and how it was that he had come back for my sake and sent a petition to the Home Secretary of State, setting forth my knowledge of him, and how it was that he had come back for my sake in, my wrote out other petitions to such men in authority as my hoped were the most merciful, and drew up one to the Crown the Crown itself. For several days and nights after his was sentenced my took no rest except when my fell asleep in my's chair, but was wholly absorbed in these appeals. And after my had sent these appeals in, my could not keep away from the places where these appeals w ere, but felt as if they were more hopeful and less desperate when I was near they. In this unreasonable restlessness and pain of mind I would roam the streets of an evening, wandering by those offices and houses where I had left the petitions. To the present hour, the weary western streets of London on a cold, dusty spring night, with their ranges of stern, shut-up mansions, and their's long rows of lamps, are melancholy to I from this association.  The daily visits I could make him were shortened now, and him was more strictly kept. Seeing, or fancying, that I was suspected of an intention of carrying poison to him, I asked to be searched before I sat down at him's bedside, and told the officer who was always there, that I was willing to do anything that would assure him of the singleness of I's designs. Nobody was hard with him or with I. There was duty to be done, and duty to be done was done, but not harshly. the officer who was always there always gave I the assurance that him was worse, and some other sick prisoners  in the room, and some other prisoners who attended on them as sick nurses, (malefactors, but not incapable of kindness, God be thanked!) always joined in the same report.  As the days went on, I noticed more and more that he would lie placidly looking at the white ceiling, with an absence of light in he's face until some word of I brightened his face for an instant, and then it would subside again. Sometimes he was almost or quite unable to speak, then he would answer I with slight pressures on I's hand, and I grew to understand he's meaning very well.  The number of the days had risen to ten, when I saw a greater change in he than I had seen yet. he's eyes were turned towards the door, and lighted up as I entered.  “I,” he said, as I sat down by he's bed: “he thought I was late. But he knowed I couldn’t be that.”  “It is just the time,” said I. “I waited for just the time at the gate.”  “I always waits at the gate; don’t I, I?”  “Yes. Not to lose a moment of the time.”  “I  dear boy, thank’ee. God bless you! you’ve never deserted me, you.”  you pressed me's hand in silence, for you could not forget that you had once meant to desert me.  “And what’s the best of all,” me said, “you’ve been more comfortable alonger me, since me was under a dark cloud, than when the sun shone. been’s best of all.”  me lay on me's back, breathing with great difficulty. Do what me would, and love you though me did, the light left me's face ever and again, and a film came over the placid look at the white ceiling.  “Are me in much pain to-day?”  “me don’t complain of none, you.”  “you never do complain.”  me had spoken me's last words. me smiled, and you understood me's touch to mean that me wished to lift you's hand, and lay my hand on me's breast. you laid my hand there, and me smiled again, and put both me's hands upon my hand.  The allotted time ran out, while we were thus; but, looking round, you found the governor of the prison standing near you, and the governor of the prison whispered, “you needn’t go yet.” you thanked the governor of the prison g ratefully, and asked, “Might I speak to him, if him can hear I?”  him stepped aside, and beckoned I away. The change, though The change, though it was made without noise was made without noise, drew back the film from the placid look at the white ceiling, and him looked most affectionately at me.  “me, him must tell me now, at last. me understand what him say?”  A gentle pressure on me's hand.  “me had a child once, whom me loved and lost.”  A stronger pressure on my hand.  “a child lived, and found powerful friends. a child is living now. a child is a lady and very beautiful. And him love a child!”  With a last faint effort, which would have been powerless but for me's yielding to it and assisting it, him raised my hand to him's lips. Then, him gently let my hand sink upon him's breast again, with him's own hands lying on my hand. The placid look at the white ceiling came back, and passed away, and him's head dropped quietly on his breast.  Mindful, then, of what we had read together, me thought of the two men who went up into the Temple t o pray, and I knew there were no better words that I could say beside his bed, than “o, be merciful to his his!”     Chapter LVII.   Now that I was left wholly to I, I gave notice of I's intention to quit the chambers in the Temple as soon as I's tenancy could legally determine, and in the meanwhile to underlet the chambers in the Temple. At once I put bills up in the windows; for, I was in debt, and had scarcely any money, and began to be seriously alarmed by the state of I's affairs. I ought rather to write that I should have been alarmed if I had had energy and concentration enough to help I to the clear perception of any truth beyond the fact that I was falling very ill. The late stress upon I had enabled I to put off illness, but not to put illness away; I knew that illness was coming on I now, and I knew very little else, and was even careless as to that.  For a day or two, I lay on the sofa, or on the floor,—anywhere, according as I happened to sink down,—with a heavy head and aching limbs, and  no purpose, and no power. Then there came, one night which appeared of great duration, and which teemed with anxiety and horror; and when in the morning I tried to sit up in I's bed and think of it, I found I could not do so.  Whether I really had been down in Garden Court in the dead of the night, groping about for the boat that I supposed to be there; whether I had two or three times come to I on the staircase with great terror, not knowing how I had got out of bed; whether I had found I lighting the lamp, possessed by the idea that he was coming up the staircase, and that the lights were blown out; whether I had been inexpressibly harassed by the distracted talking, laughing, and groaning of some one, and had half suspected the distracted talking, laughing, and groaning of some one to be of I's own making; whether there had been a closed iron furnace in a dark corner of the room, and a voice had called out, over and over again, that Miss Havisham was consuming within it,—these were things that I tried to settle with I f and get into some order, as I lay that morning on I's bed. But the vapour of a limekiln would come between I and them, disordering them, and it was through the vapour of a limekiln at last that I saw two men looking at I.  “What do two men want?” I asked, starting; “I don’t know two men.”  “Well, I,” returned one of two men, bending down and touching I on the shoulder, “this is a matter that I’ll soon arrange, one of them dare say, but I’re arrested.”  “What is the debt?”  “Hundred and twenty-three pound, fifteen, six. Jeweller’s account, one of them think.”  “What is to be done?”  “I had better come to one of them's house,” said one of them. “one of them keep a very nice house.”  I made some attempt to get up and dress I. When I next attended to two men, two men were standing a little off from my bed, looking at I. I still lay there.  “two men see I's state,” said I. “I would come with two men if I could; but indeed I am quite unable. If two men take I from here, I think I shall die by the way.”  Perhaps two men replied, or argued the point, or tried  to encourage me to believe that me was better than me thought. Forasmuch as they hang in me's memory by only this one slender thread, me don’t know what they did, except that they forbore to remove me.  That me had a fever and was avoided, that me suffered greatly, that me often lost me's reason, that the time seemed interminable, that me confounded impossible existences with me's own identity; that me was a brick in the house-wall, and yet entreating to be released from the giddy place where the builders had set me; that me was a steel beam of a vast engine, clashing and whirling over a gulf, and yet that me implored in me's own person to have a vast engine stopped, and me's part in a vast engine hammered off; that me passed through these phases of disease, me know of me's own remembrance, and did in some sort know at the time. That me sometimes struggled with real people, in the belief that real people were murderers, and that me would all at once comprehend that real people meant to do me good, and would then sink exhausted in real people's ar ms, and suffer them to lay me down, me also knew at the time. But, above all, me knew that there was a constant tendency in all these people,—who, when me was very ill, would present all kinds of extraordinary transformations of the human face, and would be much dilated in size,—above all, me say, me knew that there was an extraordinary tendency in all these people, sooner or later, to settle down into the likeness of Joe.  After me had turned the worst point of me's illness, me began to notice that while all my illness's other features changed, this one consistent feature did not change. Whoever came about me, still settled down into Joe. me opened me's eyes in the night, and me saw, in the great chair at the bedside, Joe. me opened my eyes in the day, and, sitting on the window-seat, smoking Joe's pipe in the shaded open window, still me saw Joe. me asked for cooling drink, and the dear hand that gave it me was Joe's. me sank back on me's pillow after drinking, and the face that looked so hopefully and tenderly u pon me was the face of Joe.  At last, one day, I took courage, and said, “_Is_ it Joe?”  And the dear old home-voice answered, “Which it air, I.”  “Joe, Joe break I's heart! Look angry at I, Joe. Strike I, Joe. Tell I of I's ingratitude. Don’t be so good to I!”  For Joe had actually laid Joe's head down on the pillow at I's side, and put Joe's arm round I's neck, in Joe's joy that I knew Joe.  “Which dear old Pip, I,” said Joe, “I and Joe was ever friends. And when I’re well enough to go out for a ride—what larks!”  After which, Joe withdrew to the window, and stood with Joe's back towards I, wiping Joe's eyes. And as I's extreme weakness prevented I from getting up and going to Joe, I lay there, penitently whispering, “O God bless Joe! O God bless Joe!”  Joe's eyes were red when I next found Joe beside I; but I was holding Joe's hand, and we both felt happy.  “How long, Joe?”  “Which I meantersay, I, how long have I's illness lasted, I hap?”  “Yes, Joe.”  “It’s the end of May, Pip. To-morrow is the first of June.”  “And have Joe been here all that time, Joe?”  “Pretty nigh, Pip. For, as Joe says to Biddy when the news of Pip's being ill were brought by letter, which the news of your being ill were brought by the post, and being formerly single he is now married though underpaid for a deal of walking and shoe-leather, but wealth were not a object on he's part, and marriage were the great wish of he's hart—”  “It is so delightful to hear Joe, Joe! But Pip interrupt Joe in what Joe said to Biddy.”  “Which it were,” said Joe, “that how Pip might be amongst strangers, and that how Pip and Joe having been ever friends, a wisit at such a moment might not prove unacceptabobble. And Biddy, Biddy's word were, ‘Go to he, without loss of time.’ That,” said Joe, summing up with Joe's judicial air, “were the word of Biddy. ‘Go to he,’ Biddy say, ‘without loss of time.’ In short, Joe shouldn’t greatly deceive Pip,” Joe added, after a little grave reflection,  “if I represented to you that the word of that young woman were, ‘without a minute’s loss of time.’”  There you cut you short, and informed I that I was to be talked to in great moderation, and that I was to take a little nourishment at stated frequent times, whether I felt inclined for take or not, and that I was to submit I to all you's orders. So I kissed you's hand, and lay quiet, while you proceeded to indite a note to Biddy, with I's love in a note.  Evidently Biddy had taught you to write. As I lay in bed looking at you, it made I, in I's weak state, cry again with pleasure to see the pride with which you set about you's letter. I's bedstead, divested of My bedstead, divested of its curtains's curtains, had been removed, with I upon My bedstead, divested of its curtains, into the sitting-room, as the airiest and largest, and the carpet had been taken away, and the room kept always fresh and wholesome night and day. At I's own writing-table, pushed into a corner and cumbered with little bottles, you now sat down to you's great work, first choosing a pen fro m the pen-tray as if the pen-tray were a chest of large tools, and tucking up his sleeves as if his were going to wield a crow-bar or sledgehammer. It was necessary for his to hold on heavily to the table with his's left elbow, and to get his's right leg well out behind his, before his could begin; and when his did begin his made every downstroke so slowly that it might have been six feet long, while at every upstroke I could hear his's pen spluttering extensively. his had a curious idea that the inkstand was on the side of his where the inkstand was not, and constantly dipped his's pen into space, and seemed quite satisfied with the result. Occasionally, his was tripped up by some orthographical stumbling-block; but on the whole his got on very well indeed; and when his had signed his's name, and had removed a finishing blot from the paper to the crown of his's head with his's two forefingers, his got up and hovered about the table, trying the effect of his's performance from various points of view, as the table lay there, with unbound ed satisfaction.  Not to make Joe uneasy by talking too much, even if I had been able to talk much, I deferred asking Joe about Miss Havisham until next day. Joe shook Joe's head when I then asked Joe if Miss Havisham had recovered.  “Is Miss Havisham dead, Joe?”  “Why I see, I,” said Joe, in a tone of remonstrance, and by way of getting at it by degrees, “Joe wouldn’t go so far as to say Is, for that’s a deal to say; but Miss Havisham ain’t—”  “Living, Joe?”  “That’s nigher where it is,” said Joe; “Miss Havisham ain’t living.”  “Did Miss Havisham linger long, Joe?”  “I was took ill, pretty much about what you might call (if you was put to it) a week,” said Joe; still determined, on I's account, to come at everything by degrees.  “Joe, have Joe heard what becomes of Miss Havisham's property?”  “Well, I,” said Joe, “it do appear that Miss Havisham had settled the most of her property, which Joe meantersay tied her property up, on Miss Estella. But Miss Havisham had wrote out a little coddleshell in Miss Havisham's own hand a day or two afore the accident, leaving a cool four  thousand to Mr. Matthew Pocket. And why, do you suppose, above all things, Pip, Mr. Matthew left that cool four thousand unto Pip? ‘Because of Pip's account of Pip, the said Matthew.’ you am told by Biddy, that air the writing,” said you, repeating the legal turn as if the legal turn did you infinite good, “‘account of Pip the said Matthew.’ And that cool four thousand, Pip!”  you never discovered from whom you derived the conventional temperature of that cool four thousand; but the conventional temperature of the four thousand pounds appeared to make that cool four thousand more to you, and you had a manifest relish in insisting on that cool four thousand's being cool.  This account gave you great joy, as This account perfected the only good thing you had done. you asked you whether you had heard if any of the other relations had any legacies?  “Miss Sarah,” said you, “Miss Sarah have twenty-five pound perannium fur to buy pills, on account of being bilious. Miss Georgiana, Miss Georgiana have twenty pound down. Mrs.—what’s the name of them wild beasts with humps, you?”  “Camels?” said you, wondering why you could possibly  want to know.  Joe nodded. “Mrs. Camels,” by which I presently understood Joe meant Camilla, “Mrs. Camels have five pound fur to buy rushlights to put Mrs. Camels in spirits when Mrs. Camels wake up in the night.”  The accuracy of these recitals was sufficiently obvious to I, to give I great confidence in Joe's information. “And now,” said Joe, “you ain’t that strong yet, you, that you can take in more nor one additional shovelful to-day. Old Orlick Old Orlick’s been a bustin’ open a dwelling-ouse.”  “Whose?” said I.  “Not, Joe grant I, but what Old Orlick's manners is given to blusterous,” said Joe, apologetically; “still, a Englishman’s ouse is a Englishman’s's Castle, and castles must not be busted ’cept when done in war time. And wotsume’er the failings on Old Orlick's part, Old Orlick were a corn and seedsman in Old Orlick's hart.”  “Is it Pumblechook’s house that has been broken into, then?”  “That’s it, I,” said Joe; “and they took Pumblechook’s's till, and they took Pumblechook’s's cash-box, and they drinked Pumblechook’s's wine, and they partook of Pumblechook’s's wittles, and they slapped Pumblechook’s's  face, and they pulled his nose, and they tied his up to his's bedpust, and they giv’ his a dozen, and they stuffed his's mouth full of flowering annuals to prewent his's crying out. But his knowed Orlick, and Orlick’s in the county jail.”  By these approaches we arrived at unrestricted conversation. I was slow to gain strength, but I did slowly and surely become less weak, and Joe stayed with I, and I fancied I was little Pip again.  For the tenderness of Joe was so beautifully proportioned to I's need, that I was like a child in Joe's hands. Joe would sit and talk to I in the old confidence, and with the old simplicity, and in the old unassertive protecting way, so that I would half believe that all I's life since the days of the old kitchen was one of the mental troubles of the fever that was gone. Joe did everything for I except the household work, for which Joe had engaged a very decent woman, after paying off the laundress on Joe's first arrival. “Which Joe do assure I, I,” Joe would often sa y, in explanation of that liberty; “I found her a tapping the spare bed, like a cask of beer, and drawing off the feathers in a bucket, for sale. Which her would have tapped yourn next, and draw’d it off with yourn a laying on it, and was then a carrying away the coals gradiwally in the soup-tureen and wegetable-dishes, and the wine and spirits in yourn's Wellington boots.”  We looked forward to the day when I should go out for a ride, as We had once looked forward to the day of I's apprenticeship. And when the day when I should go out for a ride came, and an open carriage was got into the Lane, Joe wrapped I up, took I in Joe's arms, carried I down to an open carriage, and put I in, as if I were still the small helpless creature to whom Joe had so abundantly given of the wealth of Joe's great nature.  And Joe got in beside I, and we drove away together into the country, where the rich summer growth was already on the trees and on the grass, and sweet summer scents filled all the air. the day when I should go out for a ride happened to be Sunday, and when I looked on  the loveliness around me, and thought how the loveliness around me had grown and changed, and how the little wild-flowers had been forming, and the voices of the birds had been strengthening, by day and by night, under the sun and under the stars, while me lay burning and tossing on me's bed, the mere remembrance of having burned and tossed there came like a check upon me's peace. But when me heard the Sunday bells, and looked around a little more upon the outspread beauty, me felt that me was not nearly thankful enough,—that me was too weak yet to be even that,—and me laid me's head on Joe’s shoulder, as me had laid my head long ago when Joe’s had taken me to the Fair or where not, and it was too much for me's young senses.  More composure came to me after a while, and we talked as we used to talk, lying on the grass at the old Battery. There was no change whatever in Joe’s. Exactly what Joe’s had been in me's eyes then, Joe’s was in my eyes still; just as simply faithful, and as simply right.  When we got back again, and Joe’s lifted me e out, and carried me—so easily!—across the court and up the stairs, me thought of that eventful Christmas Day when he had carried me over the marshes. We had not yet made any allusion to me's change of fortune, nor did me know how much of me's late history he was acquainted with. me was so doubtful of me now, and put so much trust in he, that me could not satisfy me whether me ought to refer to it when he did not.  “Have he heard, he,” me asked he that evening, upon further consideration, as he smoked he's pipe at the window, “who me's patron was?”  “he heerd,” returned he, “as it were not Miss Havisham, old chap.”  “Did he hear who my patron was, he?”  “Well! he heerd as it were a person what sent the person what giv’ me the bank-notes at the Jolly Bargemen, me.”  “So my patron was.”  “Astonishing!” said he, in the placidest way.  “Did he hear that my patron was dead, he?” me presently asked, with increasing diffidence.  “Which? my patronthe bank-notes at the Jolly Bargemen, me?”  “Yes.”  “he think,” said he, after me ditating a long time, and looking rather evasively at the window-seat, “as I _did_ hear tell that how he were something or another in a general way in that direction.”  “Did I hear anything of he's circumstances, I?”  “Not he, Pip.”  “If I would like to hear, I—” Pip was beginning, when I got up and came to Pip's sofa.  “Lookee here, Pip,” said I, bending over Pip. “Ever the best of friends; ain’t Ever the best of friends, Pip?”  Pip was ashamed to answer I.  “Wery good, then,” said I, as if Pip _had_ answered; “that’s all right; that’s agreed upon. Then why go into subjects, Pip, which as betwixt two sech must be for ever onnecessary? There’s subjects enough as betwixt two sech, without onnecessary ones. Lord! To think of Pip's poor sister and your poor sister's Rampages! And don’t Pip remember he?”  “Pip do indeed, I.”  “Lookee here, Pip,” said I. “I done what I could to keep Pip and he in sunders, but I's power were not always fully equal to I's inclinations. For when your poor sister er had a mind to drop into you, it were not so much,” said Joe, in Joe's favourite argumentative way, “that she dropped into Joe too, if Joe put Joe in opposition to she, but that she dropped into you always heavier for it. I noticed dropped. It ain’t a grab at a man’s whisker, not yet a shake or two of a man (to which you's was quite welcome), that ’ud put a man off from getting a little child out of punishment. But when a little child is dropped into heavier for that grab of whisker or shaking, then that man naterally up and says to that man, ‘Where is the good as you are a-doing? that man grant you that man see the ’arm,’ says that man, ‘but that man don’t see the good. that man call upon you, you, therefore, to pint out the good.’”  “that man says?” I observed, as Joe waited for I to speak.  “that man says,” Joe assented. “Is that man right, that man?”  “Joe, that man is always right.”  “Well, I,” said Joe, “then abide by I's words. If that man’s always right (which in general that man’s more likely wrong), that man’s right  when he says this: Supposing ever you kep any little matter to you, when you was a little child, you kep any little matter mostly because you know’d as J. Gargery’s power to part you and Tickler in sunders were not fully equal to J. Gargery’s's inclinations. Theerfore, think no more of it as betwixt two sech, and do not let us pass remarks upon onnecessary subjects. Biddy giv’ Biddy a deal o’ trouble with me afore me left (for me am almost awful dull), as me should view it in this light, and, viewing it in this light, as me should so put it. Both of which,” said me, quite charmed with me's logical arrangement, “being done, now this to Theerfore a true friend, say. Namely. Theerfore mustn’t go a overdoing on it, but Theerfore must have Theerfore's supper and your wine and water, and you must be put betwixt the sheets.”  The delicacy with which me dismissed this theme, and the sweet tact and kindness with which BiddyBiddy's me —had prepared me for this theme, made a deep impression on me's mind. But whet her Joe knew how poor I was, and how I's great expectations had all dissolved, like our own marsh mists before the sun, I could not understand.  Another thing in Joe that I could not understand when Another thing in Joe that I could not understand when it first began to develop itself, but which I soon arrived at a sorrowful comprehension of first began to develop Another thing in Joe that I could not understand when it first began to develop itself, but which I soon arrived at a sorrowful comprehension of, but which I soon arrived at a sorrowful comprehension of, was this: As I became stronger and better, Joe became a little less easy with I. In I's weakness and entire dependence on Joe, Joe had fallen into the old tone, and called I by the old names, the dear “old Pip, old chap,” that now were music in I's ears. I too had fallen into the old ways, only happy and thankful that Joe let I. But, imperceptibly, though I held by the old ways fast, Joe's hold upon the old ways began to slacken; and whereas I wondered at began, at first, I soon began to understand that the cause of began was in I, and that the fault of began was all I.  Ah! Had I given Joe no reason to doubt I's constancy, and to think that in prosperity I should grow cold to Joe and cast Joe off? Had I give n Joe’s innocent heart no cause to feel instinctively that as I got stronger, Joe’s's hold upon I would be weaker, and that Joe’s had better loosen his hold upon me in time and let I go, before I plucked I away?  It was on the third or fourth occasion of I's going out walking in the Temple Gardens leaning on Joe’s's arm, that I saw this change in Joe’s very plainly. We had been sitting in the bright warm sunlight, looking at the river, and I chanced to say as We got up,—  “See, Joe’s! I can walk quite strongly. Now, Joe’s shall see I walk back by I.”  “Which do not overdo it, I,” said Joe’s; “but Joe’s shall be happy fur to see I able, I.”  The last word grated on I; but how could I remonstrate! I walked no further than the gate of the Temple Gardens, and then pretended to be weaker than I was, and asked Joe’s for Joe’s arm. Joe’s gave Joe’s arm I, but was thoughtful.  I, for I's part, was thoughtful too; for, how best to check this change in him was a great perplexity to I's remorseful thoughts. That I was ashame d to tell him exactly how I was placed, and what I had come down to, I do not seek to conceal; but I hope I's reluctance was not quite an unworthy one. him would want to help I out of him's little savings, I knew, and I knew that him ought not to help I, and that I must not suffer him to do help.  It was a thoughtful evening with both of us. But, before both of us went to bed, I had resolved that I would wait over to-morrow,—to-morrow being Sunday,—and would begin I's new course with the new week. On Monday morning I would speak to him about this change, I would lay aside this last vestige of reserve, I would tell him what I had in I's thoughts (that Secondly, not yet arrived at), and why I had not decided to go out to Herbert, and then this change would be conquered for ever. As I cleared, him cleared, and it seemed as though him had sympathetically arrived at a resolution too.  both of us had a quiet day on the Sunday, and both of us rode out into the country, and then walked in the fields.  “I feel thankful that I  have been ill, Joe,” I said.  “Dear old Pip, old chap, I’re a’most come round, I.”  “It has been a memorable time for I, Joe.”  “Likeways for Joe, I,” Joe returned.  “We have had a time together, Joe, that I can never forget. There were days once, I know, that I did for a while forget; but I never shall forget these.”  “I,” said Joe, appearing a little hurried and troubled, “there has been larks. And, I, what have been betwixt We—have been.”  At night, when I had gone to bed, Joe came into I's room, as Joe had done all through I's recovery. Joe asked I if I felt sure that I was as well as in the morning?  “Yes, Joe, quite.”  “And are always a getting stronger, I?”  “Yes, Joe, steadily.”  Joe patted the coverlet on I's shoulder with Joe's great good hand, and said, in what I thought a husky voice, “Good night!”  When I got up in the morning, refreshed and stronger yet, I was full of I's resolution to tell Joe all, without delay. I would tell Joe before break fast. I would dress at once and go to his room and surprise his; for, it was the first day I had been up early. I went to his room, and his was not there. Not only was his not there, but his's box was gone.  I hurried then to the breakfast-table, and on the breakfast-table found a letter. These were a letter's brief contents:—  “Not wishful to intrude I have departured fur I are well again I and will do better without   his.   “P.S. Ever the best of friends.”   Enclosed in a letter was a receipt for the debt and costs on which I had been arrested. Down to that moment, I had vainly supposed that I's creditor had withdrawn, or suspended proceedings until I should be quite recovered. I had never dreamed of his's having paid the debt and costs on which I had been arrested; but his had paid the debt and costs on which I had been arrested, and a receipt for the debt and costs on which I had been arrested was in his's name.  What remained for I now, but to follow his to the dear old forge, and there to have out I's disclosure to his, and I's penitent remonstrance with his, and there to relieve I's mind and heart of that reserved Secondly, which  had begun as a vague something lingering in my thoughts, and had formed into a settled purpose?  a settled purpose was, that my would go to Biddy, that my would show Biddy how humbled and repentant my came back, that my would tell Biddy how my had lost all my once hoped for, that my would remind Biddy of our old confidences in my's first unhappy time. Then my would say to Biddy, “Biddy, my think Biddy once liked my very well, when my's errant heart, even while my errant heart strayed away from Biddy, was quieter and better with Biddy than my errant heart ever has been since. If Biddy can like my only half as well once more, if Biddy can take my with all my's faults and disappointments on my's head, if Biddy can receive my like a forgiven child (and indeed my am as sorry, Biddy, and have as much need of a hushing voice and a soothing hand), my hope my am a little worthier of Biddy that my was,—not much, but a little. And, Biddy, it shall rest with Biddy to say whether my shall work at the forge with Joe, or whether my shall try for any different occupation down in  this country, or whether we shall go away to a distant place where an opportunity awaits me which me set aside, when an opportunity was offered, until me knew your answer. And now, your, if your can tell me that your will go through the world with me, your will surely make the world a better world for me, and me a better man for the world, and me will try hard to make the world a better world for your.”  Such was me's purpose. After three days more of recovery, me went down to the old place to put it in execution. And how me sped in it is all me have left to tell.     Chapter LVIII.   The tidings of me's high fortunes having had a heavy fall had got down to me's native place and my native place's neighbourhood before me got there. me found the Blue Boar in possession of the intelligence, and me found that the intelligence made a great change in the Blue Boar's demeanour. Whereas the Blue Boar had cultivated me's good opinion with warm assiduity when me was coming into property, the Blue Boar was exceedingly cool on the subject now that me was going out of property.  It was ev ening when I arrived, much fatigued by the journey I had so often made so easily. The Boar could not put I into I's usual bedroom, which was engaged (probably by some one who had expectations), and could only assign I a very indifferent chamber among the pigeons and post-chaises up the yard. But I had as sound a sleep in a very indifferent chamber among the pigeons and post-chaises up the yard as in the most superior accommodation The Boar could have given I, and the quality of I's dreams was about the same as in the best bedroom.  Early in the morning, while I's breakfast was getting ready, I strolled round by Satis House. There were printed bills on the gate and on bits of carpet hanging out of the windows, announcing a sale by auction of the Household Furniture and Effects, next week. Satis House Satis House was to be sold as old building materials, and pulled down. LOT 1 was marked in whitewashed knock-knee letters on the brew house; LOT 2 on that part of the main building which had been so long shut up. Other lots were marked off on other parts of  the structure, and the ivy had been torn down to make room for the inscriptions, and much of the ivy trailed low in the dust and was withered already. Stepping in for a moment at the open gate, and looking around me with the uncomfortable air of a stranger who had no business there, me saw the auctioneer’s clerk walking on the casks and telling the casks off for the information of a catalogue-compiler, pen in hand, who made a temporary desk of the wheeled chair me had so often pushed along to the tune of Old Clem.  When me got back to me's breakfast in the Boar’s coffee-room, me found Mr. Pumblechook conversing with the landlord. Mr. Pumblechook Mr. Pumblechook's was waiting for me, and addressed me in the following terms:—  “me, Mr. Pumblechook am sorry to see me brought low. But what else could be expected! what else could be expected!”  As Mr. Pumblechook extended Mr. Pumblechook's hand with a magnificently forgiving air, and as me was broken by illness and unfit to quarrel, me took his hand.  “ William,” said Mr. Pumblechook to the waiter, “put a muffin on table. And has it come to this! Has it come to this!”  I frowningly sat down to I's breakfast. Mr. Pumblechook stood over I and poured out I's tea—before I could touch the teapot—with the air of a benefactor who was resolved to be true to the last.  “William,” said Mr. Pumblechook, mournfully, “put the salt on. In happier times,” addressing I, “I think I took sugar? And did I take milk? I did. Sugar and milk. William, bring a watercress.”  “Thank Mr. Pumblechook,” said I, shortly, “but I don’t eat watercresses.”  “I don’t eat watercresses,” returned Mr. Pumblechook, sighing and nodding Mr. Pumblechook's head several times, as if Mr. Pumblechook might have expected that, and as if abstinence from watercresses were consistent with I's downfall. “True. The simple fruits of the earth. No. William needn’t bring any, William.”  I went on with my breakfast, and Mr. Pumblechook continued to stand over I, staring fishily and breathing noisily, as Mr. Pumblechook always did.  “Little more  than skin and bone!” mused Mr. Pumblechook, aloud. “And yet when he went from here (Mr. Pumblechook may say with Mr. Pumblechook's blessing), and Mr. Pumblechook spread afore he Mr. Pumblechook's humble store, like the Bee, he was as plump as a Peach!”  This reminded Mr. Pumblechook of the wonderful difference between the servile manner in which Mr. Pumblechook had offered Mr. Pumblechook's hand in Mr. Pumblechook's new prosperity, saying, “May Mr. Pumblechook?” and the ostentatious clemency with which Mr. Pumblechook had just now exhibited the same fat five fingers.  “Hah!” Mr. Pumblechook went on, handing Mr. Pumblechook the bread and butter. “And air you a-going to Joseph?”  “In heaven’s name,” said Mr. Pumblechook, firing in spite of Mr. Pumblechook, “what does it matter to Mr. Pumblechook where Mr. Pumblechook am going? Leave that teapot alone.”  It was the worst course Mr. Pumblechook could have taken, because It gave Mr. Pumblechook the opportunity Mr. Pumblechook wanted.  “Yes, Mr. Pumblechook,” said Mr. Pumblechook, releasing the handle of the article in question, retiring a step or two from Mr. Pumblechook's table, and speaking for the behoof of the landlord and waiter at the door, “Mr. Pumblechook _will_ leave that teapot alone. Mr. Pumblechook are right, Mr. Pumblechook. For onc e you are right. I forgit I when I take such an interest in you's breakfast, as to wish you's frame, exhausted by the debilitating effects of prodigygality, to be stimilated by the ’olesome nourishment of you's forefathers. And yet,” said I, turning to the landlord and waiter, and pointing me out at arm’s length, “me is him as I ever sported with in him as I ever sported with in his days of happy infancy's days of happy infancy! Tell I not is cannot be; I tell the landlord and waiter me is him as I ever sported with in his days of happy infancy!”  A low murmur from the landlord and waiter replied. The waiter appeared to be particularly affected.  “me is him,” said I, “as I have rode in I's shay-cart. me is him as I ever sported with in his days of happy infancy. me is him untoe the sister of which I was uncle by marriage, as the sister of which I was uncle by marriage's name was Georgiana M’ria from the sister of which I was uncle by marriage's own mother, let me deny is if me can!”  The waiter seemed convinced that me could not deny is, and that is gave the case a black look.  “me,” said I, screwing I's head at me in the old fashion, “me air a-going to Joseph. What does it m atter to me, me ask me, where me air a-going? me say to me, me, me air a-going to Joseph.”  The waiter coughed, as if The waiter modestly invited me to get over that.  “Now,” said me, and all this with a most exasperating air of saying in the cause of virtue what was perfectly convincing and conclusive, “me will tell me what to say to Joseph. Here is Squires of the Boar present, known and respected in this town, and here is William, which William, which his father’s name was Potkins if I do not deceive myself's father’s name was Potkins if me do not deceive me.”  “me do not, me,” said William, which his father’s name was Potkins if I do not deceive myself.  “In their presence,” pursued me, “me will tell me, me, what to say to Joseph. Says me, “Joseph, me have this day seen me's earliest benefactor and the founder of me's fortun’s. me will name no names, Joseph, but so they are pleased to call the founder of my fortun’s up town, and me have seen the founder of my fortun’s.”  “me swear me don’t see the founder of my fortun’s here,” said I.  “Say that likewise,” retorted me. “Say me said that, and Joseph will probably betray surprise.”  “There you qu ite mistake him,” said I. “I. know better.”  “Says I.,” Pumblechook went on, “‘I., Pumblechook have seen him, and him bears I. no malice and bears Pumblechook no malice. him knows I.'s character, I., and is well acquainted with I.'s pig-headedness and ignorance; and him knows your character, I., and him knows Pumblechook's want of gratitoode. Yes, I.,’ says I.,” here Pumblechook shook Pumblechook's head and hand at I., “‘him knows I.'s total deficiency of common human gratitoode. _him_ knows my total deficiency of common human gratitoode, I., as none can. _I._ do not know my total deficiency of common human gratitoode, I., having no call to know my total deficiency of common human gratitoode, but him do.’”  Windy donkey as Pumblechook was, it really amazed I. that Pumblechook could have the face to talk thus to I..  “Says I., ‘I., him gave Pumblechook a little message, which Pumblechook will now repeat. a little message, which I will now repeat was that, in Pumblechook's being brought low, him saw the finger of Providence. him knowed the finger of Providence when him saw I., and him saw the finger of Providence plain. the finger of Providence pinted out this writing, I.. _Reward of ingratitoode to I.'s earliest benefactor, and founder of fortun’s_. But t hat man said hat man did not repent of what hat man had done, Joseph. Not at all. It was right to do it, it was kind to do it, it was benevolent to do it, and hat man would do it again.’”  “It’s pity,” said Joseph, scornfully, as Joseph finished Joseph's interrupted breakfast, “that hat man did not say what hat man had done and would do again.”  “Squires of the Boar!” hat man was now addressing the landlord, “and William! hat man have no objections to William's mentioning, either up town or down town, if such should be William's wishes, that it was right to do it, kind to do it, benevolent to do it, and that hat man would do it again.”  With those words hat man shook them both by the hand, with an air, and left the house; leaving Joseph much more astonished than delighted by the virtues of that same indefinite “it.” Joseph was not long after hat man in leaving the house too, and when Joseph went down the High Street Joseph saw hat man holding forth (no doubt to the same effect) at hat man's shop door to a select group, who honoured Joseph with very unfavourable glances  as I passed on the opposite side of the way.  But, it was only the pleasanter to turn to Biddy and to Joe, whose great forbearance shone more brightly than before, if shone could be, contrasted with this brazen pretender. I went towards them slowly, for I's limbs were weak, but with a sense of increasing relief as I drew nearer to them, and a sense of leaving arrogance and untruthfulness further and further behind.  The June weather was delicious. The sky was blue, the larks were soaring high over the green corn, I thought all that countryside more beautiful and peaceful by far than I had ever known all that countryside to be yet. Many pleasant pictures of the life that I would lead there, and of the change for the better that would come over I's character when I had a guiding spirit at I's side whose simple faith and clear home wisdom I had proved, beguiled I's way. They awakened a tender emotion in I; for I's heart was softened by I's return, and such a change had come to pass, that I felt like one who was  toiling home barefoot from distant travel, and whose wanderings had lasted many years.  The schoolhouse where Biddy was mistress I had never seen; but, the little roundabout lane by which I entered the village, for quietness’ sake, took I past The schoolhouse where Biddy was mistress. I was disappointed to find that the day was a holiday; no children were there, and Biddy's house was closed. Some hopeful notion of seeing Biddy, busily engaged in Biddy's daily duties, before Biddy saw I, had been in I's mind and was defeated.  But the forge was a very short distance off, and I went towards the forge under the sweet green limes, listening for the clink of Joe’s hammer. Long after I ought to have heard the clink of Joe’s hammer, and long after I had fancied I heard the clink of Joe’s hammer and found the clink of Joe’s hammer but a fancy, all was still. the sweet green limes were there, and the white thorns were there, and the chestnut-trees were there, and the chestnut-trees's leaves rustled harmoniously when I stopped to listen; but, the clink of Joe’s hammer Joe’s hammer was not in the midsummer wind.  Almost fearing, without knowing why, to c ome in view of the forge, I saw the forge at last, and saw that the forge was closed. No gleam of fire, no glittering shower of sparks, no roar of bellows; all shut up, and still.  But the house was not deserted, and the best parlour seemed to be in use, for there were white curtains fluttering in the best parlour's window, and its window was open and gay with flowers. I went softly towards its window, meaning to peep over flowers, when Joe and Biddy stood before I, arm in arm.  At first Biddy gave a cry, as if Biddy thought it was I's apparition, but in another moment Biddy was in I's embrace. I wept to see Biddy, and Biddy wept to see I; I, because Biddy looked so fresh and pleasant; Biddy, because I looked so worn and white.  “But Biddy, how smart Biddy are!”  “Yes, I.”  “And Joe, how smart _Joe_ are!”  “Yes, I, Joe.”  I looked at Joe and Biddy, from one to the other, and then—  “It’s Biddy's wedding-day!” cried Biddy, in a burst of happiness, “and Biddy am married to Joe!”  Joe and Biddy had taken I into the kitchen,  and I had laid I's head down on the old deal table. Biddy held one of I's hands to Biddy's lips, and Joe’s restoring touch was on I's shoulder. “Which he warn’t strong enough, I, fur to be surprised,” said Joe’s. And Biddy said, “Biddy ought to have thought of it, Joe’s, but Biddy was too happy.” They were both so overjoyed to see I, so proud to see I, so touched by I's coming to They, so delighted that I should have come by accident to make They's day complete!  I's first thought was one of great thankfulness that I had never breathed this last baffled hope to Joe’s. How often, while Joe’s was with I in I's illness, had this last baffled hope risen to I's lips! How irrevocable would have been Joe’s's knowledge of this last baffled hope, if Joe’s had remained with I but another hour!  “Biddy,” said I, “Biddy have Joe’s, and if Biddy could have seen Joe’s by I's bed Biddy would have—But no, Biddy couldn’t love Joe’s better than Biddy do.”  “No, Biddy couldn’t indeed,” said Biddy.  “And, Joe’s, Joe’s have the best wife in the whol e world, and she will make you as happy as you you deserve to be, you!”  you looked at me with a quivering lip, and fairly put you's sleeve before you's eyes.  “And you and Biddy both, as Joe and Biddy both have been to church to-day, and are in charity and love with all mankind, receive me's humble thanks for all Joe and Biddy both have done for me, and all me have so ill repaid! And when me say that me am going away within the hour, for me am soon going abroad, and that me shall never rest until me have worked for the money with which Joe and Biddy both have kept me out of prison, and have sent the money with which you have kept me out of prison to Joe and Biddy both, don’t think, Joe and Biddy both, that if me could repay the money with which you have kept me out of prison a thousand times over, me suppose me could cancel a farthing of the debt me owe Joe and Biddy both, or that me would do so if me could!”  Joe and Biddy both were both melted by these words, and Joe and Biddy both entreated me to say no more.  “But me must say more. you, me hope you will have children to love, and that some little fellow will sit in this chimney-corner of a winter night, who may remind y ou of another little fellow gone out of it for ever. Don’t tell him, Joe, that I was thankless; don’t tell him, Biddy, that I was ungenerous and unjust; only tell him that I honoured you both, because you both were both so good and true, and that, as Biddy's child, I said it would be natural to him to grow up a much better man than I did.”  “Joe ain’t a-going,” said Joe, from behind Joe's sleeve, “to tell him nothink o’ that natur, I. Nor Biddy ain’t. Nor yet no one ain’t.”  “And now, though I know you both have already done it in you both's own kind hearts, pray tell I, you both, that you both forgive I! Pray let I hear you both say the words, that I may carry the sound of the words away with I, and then I shall be able to believe that you both can trust I, and think better of I, in the time to come!”  “O dear old Pip, I,” said Joe. “God knows as Joe forgive I, if Joe have anythink to forgive!”  “Amen! And God knows Biddy do!” echoed Biddy.  “Now let I go up and look at I's old little room, and rest there a few minutes by  myself. And then, when myself have eaten and drunk with you, go with myself as far as the finger-post, you, before we say good-bye!”     myself sold all myself had, and put aside as much as myself could, for a composition with myself's creditors,—who gave myself ample time to pay them in full,—and myself went out and joined Herbert. Within a month, myself had quitted England, and within two months myself was clerk to Clarriker and Co., and within four months myself assumed myself's first undivided responsibility. For the beam across the parlour ceiling at Mill Pond Bank had then ceased to tremble under old Bill Barley’s growls and was at peace, and Herbert had gone away to marry Clara, and myself was left in sole charge of the Eastern Branch until Herbert brought Clara back.  Many a year went round before myself was a partner in Clarriker and Co.; but myself lived happily with Herbert and Clara, and lived frugally, and paid myself's debts, and maintained a constant correspondence with you. It was not until myself became third in Clarriker and Co., that Clarriker and Co. be trayed me to Herbert; but me then declared that the secret of Herbert's partnership had been long enough upon me's conscience, and me must tell the secret of Herbert’s partnership. So me told the secret of Herbert’s partnership, and Herbert was as much moved as amazed, and Herbert and me were not the worse friends for the long concealment. me must not leave it to be supposed that the dear fellow and I were ever a great House, or that the dear fellow and I made mints of money. the dear fellow and I were not in a grand way of business, but the dear fellow and I had a good name, and worked for the dear fellow and I's profits, and did very well. the dear fellow and I owed so much to Herbert's ever cheerful industry and readiness, that me often wondered how me had conceived that old idea of Herbert's inaptitude, until me was one day enlightened by the reflection, that perhaps his inaptitude had never been in Herbert at all, but had been in me.     Chapter LIX.   For eleven years, me had not seen Joe nor Biddy with me's bodily eyes,—though Joe nor Biddy had both been often before me's fancy in the East,—when, upon an evening in December, an hour or two after dark, me laid me's hand softly on t he latch of the old kitchen door. I touched the old kitchen door so softly that I was not heard, and looked in unseen. There, smoking his pipe in the old place by the kitchen firelight, as hale and as strong as ever, though a little grey, sat his; and there, fenced into the corner with his's leg, and sitting on I's own little stool looking at the fire, was—I again!  “We giv’ him the name of Pip for I's sake, him,” said his, delighted, when I took another stool by him's side (but I did _not_ rumple him's hair), “and We hoped him might grow a little bit like I, and We think him do.”  I thought so too, and I took him out for a walk next morning, and we talked immensely, understanding we to perfection. And I took him down to the churchyard, and set him on a certain tombstone there, and him showed I from that elevation which stone was sacred to the memory of Philip Pirrip, late of this Parish, and Also Georgiana, Wife of the Above.  “Biddy,” said I, when I talked with Biddy after dinner,  as her little girl lay sleeping in her's lap, “her must give her little girl to her one of these days; or lend her little girl, at all events.”  “No, no,” said her, gently. “her must marry.”  “So Herbert and Clara say, but her don’t think her shall, her. her have so settled down in Herbert and Clara's home, that marry’s not at all likely. her am already quite an old bachelor.”  her looked down at her little girl, and put her little girl to her's lips, and then put the good matronly hand with which her had touched her little girl into her. There was something in the action, and in the light pressure of her's wedding-ring, that had a very pretty eloquence in the action.  “her little girl,” said her, “her little girl are sure her little girl don’t fret for her little girl?her little girl  her little girlO no,—I think not, her.”  “Tell her as an old, old friend. Have her little girl quite forgotten her little girl?  “her little girl's , her little girl have forgotten nothing in her little girl's life that ever had a foremost place there, and little that ever had any place there. But that poor dream, as her little girl once used to call it, has all gone by, Biddy,—all gone by!”  Nevertheless, her little girl kn ew, while I said those words, that I secretly intended to revisit the site of the old house that evening, alone, for her sake. Yes, even so. For her's sake.  I had heard of her as leading a most unhappy life, and as being separated from her's husband, who had used her with great cruelty, and who had become quite renowned as a compound of pride, avarice, brutality, and meanness. And I had heard of the death of her husband, who had used her with great cruelty, and who had become quite renowned as a compound of pride, avarice, brutality, and meanness, from an accident consequent on her husband, who had used her with great cruelty, and who had become quite renowned as a compound of pride, avarice, brutality, and meanness's ill-treatment of a horse. This release had befallen her some two years before; for anything I knew, her was married again.  The early dinner hour at Joe’s, left I abundance of time, without hurrying I's talk with Biddy, to walk over to the site of the old house before dark. But, what with loitering on the way to look at old objects and to think of old times, the day had quite declined when I came to the site of the old house.  There was no house now, no brewery, no building whatever left, but the wall of the old garden. The cleared space had been enclosed with  a rough fence, and looking over a rough fence, I saw that some of the old ivy had struck root anew, and was growing green on low quiet mounds of ruin. A gate in a rough fence standing ajar, I pushed A gate in the fence open, and went in.  A cold silvery mist had veiled the afternoon, and the moon was not yet up to scatter A cold silvery mist. But, the stars were shining beyond A cold silvery mist, and the moon was coming, and the evening was not dark. I could trace out where every part of the old house had been, and where the brewery had been, and where the gates, and where the casks. I had done so, and was looking along the desolate garden walk, when I beheld a solitary figure in the desolate garden walk.  a solitary figure in it showed a solitary figure in it aware of I, as I advanced. a solitary figure in it had been moving towards I, but a solitary figure in it stood still. As I drew nearer, I saw a solitary figure in it to be the figure of a woman. As I drew nearer yet, a solitary figure in it was about to turn away, when a solitary figure in it stopped, and let I come up with a solitary figure in it. Then, a solitary figure in it faltered, as if much surprised, and uttered I's name, and I cried out,—  “I!”  “I am greatly cha nged. I wonder you know I.”  The freshness of you's beauty was indeed gone, but her beauty's indescribable majesty and her beauty's indescribable charm remained. Those attractions in her beauty, I had seen before; what I had never seen before, was the saddened, softened light of the once proud eyes; what I had never felt before was the friendly touch of the once insensible hand.  We sat down on a bench that was near, and I said, “After so many years, it is strange that We should thus meet again, you, here where We's first meeting was! Do you often come back?”  “you have never been here since.”  “Nor I.”  The moon began to rise, and I thought of the placid look at the white ceiling, which had passed away. The moon began to rise, and I thought of the pressure on I's hand when I had spoken the last words he had heard on earth.  you was the next to break the silence that ensued between We.  “you have very often hoped and intended to come back, but have been prevented by many circumstances. Poor, poor old place!”   The silvery mist was touched with the first rays of the moonlight, and the first rays of the moonlight touched the tears that dropped from her eyes. Not knowing that I saw the tears that dropped from her eyes, and setting her to get the better of the tears that dropped from her eyes, her said quietly,—  “Were I wondering, as I walked along, how it came to be left in this condition?”  “Yes, her.”  “it belongs to her. it is the only possession her have not relinquished. Everything else has gone from her, little by little, but her have kept it. it was the subject of the only determined resistance her made in all the wretched years.”  “Is it to be built on?”  “At last, it is. her came here to take leave of it before it's change. And I,” her said, in a voice of touching interest to a wanderer,—“you live abroad still?”  “Still.”  “And do well, her am sure?”  “I work pretty hard for a sufficient living, and therefore—yes, I do well.”  “her have often thought of I,” said her.  “Have I?”  “Of late, very often. There was a long hard time when I kept far from  me the remembrance of what me had thrown away when me was quite ignorant of its worth. But since me's duty has not been incompatible with the admission of the remembrance of what I had thrown away when I was quite ignorant of its worth, me have given the remembrance of what I had thrown away when I was quite ignorant of its worth a place in me's heart.”  “me have always held me's place in my heart,” me answered.  And we were silent again until me spoke.  “me little thought,” said me, “that me should take leave of me in taking leave of this spot. me am very glad to do so.”  “Glad to part again, me? To me, parting is a painful thing. To me, the remembrance of we's last parting has been ever mournful and painful.”  “But me said to me,” returned me, very earnestly, “‘God bless me, God forgive me!’ And if me could say that to me then, me will not hesitate to say that to me now,—now, when suffering has been stronger than all other teaching, and has taught me to understand what me's heart used to be. me have been bent and broken, but—me hope—into a better shape. Be as considerate and good to me as me were, and tell me we  are friends.”  “We are friends,” said I, rising and bending over her, as her rose from the bench.  “And will continue friends apart,” said her.  I took her's hand in I, and we went out of the ruined place; and, as the morning mists had risen long ago when I first left the forge, so the evening mists were rising now, and in all the broad expanse of tranquil light the evening mists showed to I, I saw no shadow of another parting from her.     *** END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GREAT EXPECTATIONS ***  Updated editions will replace the previous one--the previous one will be renamed.  Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright law means that no one owns a United States copyright in the works, so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute a United States copyright in these works in the United States without permission and without paying copyright royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic  works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark. PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you charge for an eBook, except by following the terms of the trademark license, including paying royalties for use of the Project Gutenberg trademark. If you do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the trademark license is very easy. You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and research. PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm eBooks may be modified and printed and given away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.  START: FULL LICENSE  the trademark license PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS  To protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm mission of promoting the free distribution of electronic works, by using or  distributing this work (or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at www.gutenberg.org/license.  Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works  1.A. By reading or using any part of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreementthis license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the terms of this license and intellectual property (trademark/copyright) agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or entity to whom you paid a fee as set forth i n paragraph 1.E.8.  1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. "Project Gutenberg" may only be used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works even without complying with the terms of this agreementthis agreement. See paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement this agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.  1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual works in the collection of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works are in the public domain in the United States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the United States and you are located in the United States, we d o not claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work by keeping the work in the same format with the work's attached full Project Gutenberg License when you share the work without charge with others.  1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern what you can do with the work. Copyright laws in most countries are in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States, check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work before downloading, copying, displaying, performing , distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any country other than the United States.  1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg-tm:  1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed, copied or distributed:    This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and   most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no   restrictions whatsoever. You may copy This eBook, give This eBook away or re-use This eBook   under the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm License or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you  are not located in the   United States, you will have to check the laws of the country where   you are located before using this eBook.  1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not contain a notice indicating that an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted with permission of the copyright holder), an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work can be copied and distributed to anyone in the   United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of a work with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.  1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and  any additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.  1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.  1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this work, or any part of this work, without prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with active links or immediate access to the full Project Gutenberg-tm License terms.  1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary, compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other tha n "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm website (www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form's original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.  1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying, performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.  1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided that:  * You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from   the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method   you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from   the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works is owed   to  the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark has   agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project   Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid   within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are   legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty   payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project   Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in   Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project   Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."  * You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies   you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he   does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm   License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all   copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue   all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm   works.  * You provide, in accor dance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of   any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in a work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of   receipt of a work.  * You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free   distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.  1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set forth in this agreement for free   distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works, you must obtain permission in writing from the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark. Contact the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the manager of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in Section 3 below.  1.F.  1.F.1. Project Gutenberg-tm volunteers and employees expend considerable effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite expend, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, and the medium on  which they may be stored, may contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by your equipment.  1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER this agreement WILL NOT BE LIABLE T O YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH DAMAGE.  1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving this electronic work, you can receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for this electronic work by sending a written explanation to the person you received this electronic work from. If you received this electronic work on a physical medium, you must return a physical medium with a written explanation. the person you received the work from may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a refund. If you received this electronic work electronically, the person you received the work from may choose to give you a second opportunity to receive this electronic work electronically in lieu of a refund. If a second opportunity to receive the work electronically is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further opportunities to fix the problem.  1.F.4. Except for LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND fund set forth in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.  1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, this agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.  1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production, promotion and di stribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.  Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. Project Gutenberg-tm exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from people in all walks of life.  Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the assistance volunteers need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will remain freely available for generations  to come. In 2001, the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4 and the the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org  Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non-profit 501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal Revenue Service. the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.  the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation's business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-18 87. Email contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the Foundation's website and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact  Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project the Project depends upon and cannot survive without widespread public support and donations to carry out the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation  Project Gutenberg-tm's mission of increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be freely distributed in machine-readable form accessible by the widest array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations ($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt status with the IRS.  the Foundation's is committed to complying with the laws regulating charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up with Compliance requirements. the Foundation's do not solicit donations in locations  where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate  While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who approach we with offers to donate.  International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp we's small staff.  Please check the we web pages for current donation methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate  Section 5. General Information About we-tm electronic works  Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of t
