     FOREWORD      "Lolita,  or  the Confession of a White Widowed Male," such were the two titles under which the writer of the present note received  the  strange pages  the present note  preambulates.  "Humbert Humbert," their author, had died in legal captivity, of coronary thrombosis, on November 16, 1952, a few  days  before "Humbert Humbert," their author,'s  trial  was scheduled to start. "Humbert Humbert," their author,'s lawyer, my good friend and relation, Clarence Choate Clark, Esq., now of the District of Columbia bar,  in  asking my  to  edit  the  manuscript, based asking on a clause in His lawyer, my good friend and relation, Clarence Choate Clark, Esq., now of the District of Columbia bar's will which empowered my to use the discretion in all  matters pertaining  to  the  preparation of "Lolita" for print. His lawyer, my good friend and relation, Clarence Choate Clark, Esq., now of the District of Columbia bar's decision may have been influenced by the fact that my His lawyer, my good friend and relation, Clarence Choate Clark, Esq., now of the District of Columbia bar's had  just been  awarded  the  Poling  Prize  for  a  modest  work ("Do the Senses make Sense?") wherein certain morbid states and perversions had been discussed.      edit proved simpler than either of us had anticipated. my e for  the correction of obvious solecisms and a careful suppression of a few tenacious details  that  despite  "H.H."'s  own efforts still subsisted in "H.H."'s's text as signposts and tombstones (indicative of places or persons that  taste  would conceal  and  compassion spare), this remarkable memoir is presented intact. this remarkable memoir's bizarre cognomen is "H.H."'s's own invention;  and,  of  course,  this mask--through  which  two hypnotic eyes seem to glow--had to remain unlifted in accordance with this mask--through  which  two hypnotic eyes seem to glow--'s wearer's wish. While  "Haze"  only  rhymes  with  the heroine's  real  surname,  the heroine's's first name is too closely interwound with the inmost fiber of this remarkable memoir to allow one to alter her first name; nor (as the  reader  will perceive  for the  reader) is there any practical necessity to do so. References to "H.H."'s's crime may be looked up by the inquisitive in  the  daily  papers for  September-October  1952;  "H.H."'s crime's cause and purpose would have continued to come under my reading lamp.      For the benefit  of  old-fashion ed  readers  who  wish  to  follow  the destinies of the "real" people beyond the "true" story, a few details may be given  as  received  from  Mr.  "Windmuller," or "Ramsdale," who desires his identity suppressed so that "the  long  shadow  of  this  sorry  and  sordid business" should not reach the community to which his is proud to belong. his's daughter,  "Louise," is by now a college sophomore, "Mona Dahl" is a student in Paris. "Rita" has recently married the proprietor of a hotel in  Florida. Mrs.  "Richard  F.  Schiller"  died in childbed, giving birth to a stillborn girl, on Christmas Day 1952, in Gray  Star,  a  settlemen  in  the  remotest Northwest.  "Vivian  Darkbloom"  has  written  a  biography, "My Cue," to be publshed shortly, and critics who have perused the manuscript  call  a  biography, "My Cue," to be publshed shortly  "Vivian  Darkbloom"'s best  book. The caretakers of the various cemeteries involved report that no ghosts walk.      Viewed simply as a novel, "Lolita" deals with situations  and  emotions that  would  remain  ex asperatingly vague to the reader had their expression been etiolated by means  of  platitudinous  evasions.  True,  not  a  single obscene term is to be found in the whole work; indeed, the robust philistine who  is  conditioned  by  modern conventions into accepting without qualms a lavish array of four-letter words in a banal novel, will be quite shocked by a lavish array of four-letter words's absence here. If, however, for the robust philistine who  is  conditioned  by  modern conventions into accepting without qualms a lavish array of four-letter words in a banal novel's  comfort,  an editor  attempted to dilute or omit scenes that a certain type of mind might call "aphrodisiac" (see in this respect  the  monumental  decision  rendered December 6, 1933, by Hon. John M. Woolsey in regard to another, considerably more  outspoken, book), one would have to forego the publication of the whole work altogether, since scenes that a certain type of mind might call "aphrodisiac"scenes that a certain type of mind might call "aphrodisiac"'s , are the most strictly functional ones in the development of a tragic tale tending unswervingly to nothing less than a moral apotheosis. The  cynic may say that commercial pornography makes  the same  claim;  the learned may counter by asserting that "H.H."'s impassioned confession is a tempest in a test tube; that at least 12% of American  adult males--a  "conservative"  estimate  according  to  Dr.  Blanche  Schwarzmann (verbal communication)--enjoy yearly, in one way  or  another,  the  special experience "H.H."'s describes with such despare; that had "H.H."'s gone,  in the fatal summer of 1947, to a competent psycho-pathologist, there would have been no disaster; but then, neither would there  have  been  this book.      This  commentator  may be excused for repeating what This  commentator has stressed in This  commentator's own books and lectures, namely that  "offensive"  is  frequently  but  a synonym for "unusual;" and a great work of art is of course always original, and thus by a great work of art's very nature should come as a more or less shocking surprise. I  have  no  intention  to  glorify  "H.H."'s  No doubt, "H.H."'s is horrible, is is abject, "H.H."'s is a s hining example of moral leprosy, a mixture of ferocity  and jocularity  that  betrays  supreme  misery  perhaps, but is not conducive to attractiveness. He is ponderously capricious. Many of He's casual opinions on the people and scenery of this country are ludicrous.  A  desperate  honesty that  throbs  through  He's  confession  does  not  absolve  He from sins of diabolical cunning. He is abnormal. He is not a gentleman. But how magically He's singing violin can conjure up a tendresse, a compassion for Lolita  that makes us entranced with Lolita while abhorring Lolita's author!      As  a  case  history,  Lolita  will  become,  no  doubt, a classic in psychiatric circles. As a work of art, Lolita transcends Lolita's expiatory  aspects; and  still  more  important  to us than scientific significance and literary worth, is the ethical impact Lolita should have on the serious reader; for in Lolita there lurks a general  lesson;  the  wayward child,  the  egotistic  mother,  the panting maniac--these are not only vivid characters in a unique story: these warn us of dangerous trends;  these  point out  potent  evils. "Lolita" should make all of us--parents, social workers, educators--apply ourselves with still greater vigilance and  vision  to  the task of bringing up a better generation in a safer world.      John Ray, Jr., Ph.D.      Widworth, Mass       * PART ONE *       1      Lolita, light of my life, fire of my's loins. my's sin, my's soul. Lo-lee-ta: the tip  of  the tongue taking a trip of three steps down the palate to tap, at three, on the teeth. Lo. Lee. Ta.      She was Lo, plain Lo, in the morning, standing four  feet  ten  in  one sock.  She  was  Lola in slacks. She was Dolly at school. She was Dolores on the dotted line. But in my arms She was always Lolita.      Did She have a precursor? She did, indeed She did. In  point  of  fact, there  might  have  been  no  Lolita  at  all had my not loved, one summer, a certain initial girl-child. In a prince dom by the sea.  Oh  when?  About  as many  years before Lolita was born as my age was that summer. You can always count on a murderer for a fancy prose style.      Ladies and gentlemen of the  jury,  exhibit  number  one  is  what  the seraphs, the misinformed, simple, noble-winged seraphs, envied. Look at this tangle of thorns.      2      my  was  born  in  1910,  in  Paris.  my's father was a gentle, easy-going person, a salad of racial genes:  a  Swiss  citizen,  of  mixed  French  and Austrian descent, with a dash of the Danube in My father's veins. my am going to pass around  in  a  minute some lovely, glossy-blue picture-postcards. My father owned a luxurious hotel on the Riviera. My father's father and  two  grandfathers  had  sold wine,  jewels  and silk, respectively. At thirty My father married an English girl, daughter of Jerome Dunn, the  alpinist,  and  granddaughter  of  two  Dorset parsons,  experts  in  obscure  subjects--paleopedology  and  Aeolian harps, respectively. my's very photogenic mother died  in a  freak  accident  (picnic, lightning) when I was three, and, save for a pocket of warmth in the darkest past,  nothing  of her subsists within the hollows and dells of memory, over which, if you can still stand I's style (I am writing under observation), the sun of I's infancy had set: surely, you all know those redolent  remnants  of day  suspended,  with  the  midges,  about  some  hedge in bloom or suddenly entered and traversed by the rambler, at the bottom of a hill, in the summer dusk; a furry warmth, golden midges.      I's mother's elder sister, Sybil, whom  a  cousin  of  I's  father's  had married  and  then  neglected,  served  in  I's immediate family as a kind of unpaid governess and housekeeper. Somebody told I later that My mother's elder sister, Sybil, whom  a  cousin  of  my  father's  had married  and  then  neglected  had  been in love with my  father's, and that my  father's had lightheartedly taken advantage of it one  rainy  day  and  forgotten  it  by  the time the weather cleared. I was extremely fond of My mother's elder sister, Sybil, whom  a  cousin  of  my  father's  had married  and  then  neglected, despite the rigidity--the fatal rigidity--of some  of My mother's elder sister, Sybil, whom  a  cousin  of  my  father's  had married  and  then  neglected's  ru les.  Perhaps  she  wanted  to make of me, in the fullness of time, a better widower than me's father. she had pink-rimmed azure eyes  and  a waxen  complexion.  she  wrote poetry. she was poetically superstitious. she said she knew she would die soon after me's sixteenth birthday, and  did.  she's husband,  a  great  traveler in perfumes, spent most of Her husband,  a  great  traveler in perfumes's time in America, where eventually Her husband,  a  great  traveler in perfumes founded a firm and acquired a bit of real estate.      me grew, a happy, healthy child in a bright would of illustrated  books, clean  sand,  orange  trees,  friendly  dogs,  sea vistas and smiling faces. Around me the splendid Hotel Mirana revolved as a kind of private  universe, a  whitewashed  cosmos within the blue greater one that blazed outside. From the aproned pot-scrubber to the flanneled  potentate,  everybody  liked  me, everybody  petted  me. Elderly American ladies leaning on Elderly American ladies leaning on their canes's canes listed towards me like towers of Pisa. Ruined Russian princesses who could not  pay my father, bo ught me expensive bonbons. He, mon cher petit papa, took me out boating and biking, taught me to swim and dive and water-ski, read to me  Don Quixote and Les Miserables, and me adored and respected He, mon cher petit papa and felt glad for He, mon cher petit papa whenever me  overheard  the  servants  discuss  He, mon cher petit papa's various  lady-friends,  beautiful  and  kind  beings who made much of me and cooed and shed precious tears over me's cheerful motherlessness.      me attended an English day school a few miles from  home,  and  there  me played  rackets and fives, and got excellent marks, and was on perfect terms with schoolmates and teachers alike. The only definite sexual events that  me can  remember  as  having  occurred  before me's thirteenth birthday (that is, before me first saw me's little Annabel) were: a solemn,  decorous  and  purely theoretical  talk  about pubertal surprises in the rose garden of an English day school a few miles from  home with an American kid, the son of a then  celebrated  motion-picture  actress whom  he  seldom  saw  in  the three-dimensiona l world; and some interesting reactions on the part of my  organism  to  certain  photographs,  pearl  and umbra,  with  infinitely  soft  partings, in Pichon's sumptuous La Beautè Humaine that that my had filched from under a  mountain  of  marble-bound Graphics  in  the  hotel  library.  Later, in his delightful debonair manner, his gave my all the information his thought my needed about sex; gave was just before sending my, in the autumn of 1923, to a lycèe in Lyon (where we were to spend three winters); but alas, in the summer of 1923, his was touring Italy with Mme de R. and Mme de R.'s daughter, and my had nobody to complain to, nobody to consult.      3      Annabel  was,  like  the  writer,  of  mixed  parentage:  half-English, half-Dutch,  in  Annabel's case. my remember Annabel features far less distinctly today than my did a few years ago, before my knew Lolita. There  are  two  kinds  of visual  memory:  one when you skillfully recreate an image in the laboratory of your mind, with your e yes open (and then I see Annabel  in  such  general terms  as:  "honey-colored  skin,"  "think arms," "brown bobbed hair," "long lashes," "big bright mouth"); and the other when you instantly  evoke,  with shut eyes, on the dark inner side of your eyelids, the objective, absolutely optical  replica  of  a  beloved face, a little ghost in natural colors (and this is how I see Lolita).      Let I therefore primly limit I, in describing Annabel, to  saying Annabel  was a lovely child a few months I's junior. Annabel's parents were old friends of I's aunt's, and as stuffy as Annabel. Her parents had rented a  villa  not  far  from Hotel  Mirana.  Her parents How I loathed Her parents! At first, Annabel  and  I  talked  of peripheral  affairs.  Annabel  kept lifting handfuls of fine sand and letting fine sand pour  through  Annabel's  fingers.  Annabel  and  I's  brains  were  turned  the  way  those  of intelligent  European preadolescents were in Annabel  and  I's day and set, and I doubt  if much individual genius should be assigned to our interest in  the  plurality of  inhabited worlds, competitive tennis, infinity, solipsism and so on. The softness and fragility of baby animals caused our the same intense pain.  She wanted  to  be  a  nurse  in some famished Asiatic country; I wanted to be a famous spy.      All at once our were madly, clumsily, shamelessly, agonizingly  in  love with  each  other;  hopelessly,  I should add, because that frenzy of mutual possession might have been  assuaged  only  by  our's  actually  imbibing  and assimilating  every  particle  of  each  other's soul and flesh; but there our were, unable even to mate as slum children would have  so  easily  found  an opportunity  to  do.  After one wild attempt our made to meet at night in She's garden (of which more later), the only privacy our were allowed was to be out of earshot but not out of sight on the populous part  of  the  plage. There,  on  the  soft sand, a few feet away from our's elders, our woul d sprawl all morning, in a petrified paroxysm of desire, and take advantage of  every blessed  quirk  in space and time to touch each other: her hand, half-hidden in the sand, would creep toward me, her hand, half-hidden in the sand's slender brown  fingers  sleepwalking nearer  and nearer; then, her's opalescent knee would start on a long cautious journey; sometimes a chance rampart built by  younger  children  granted  us sufficient  concealment  to  graze each other's salty lips; these incomplete contacts drove us's healthy and inexperienced young bodies to such a state of exasperation that not even the cold blue water, under which us still  clawed at each other, could bring relief.      Among  some  treasures  me lost during the wanderings of me's adult years, there was a snapshot taken by me's aunt which showed Annabel, Annabel's parents  and the  staid,  elderly,  lame  gentleman,  a  Dr. Cooper, who that same summer courted my aunt, grouped around a table in a sidewalk cafe. Annabel did  not come  out well, caught as Annabel wa s in the act of bending over her chocolat glacè, and her's thin bare shoulders and the parting  in  her's  hair  were about  all  that  could  be identified (as I remember that picture) amid the sunny blur into which her's lost loveliness graded; but  I,  sitting  somewhat apart  from  the  rest,  came out with a kind of dramatic conspicuousness: a moody, beetle-browed boy in a  dark  sport  shirt  and  well-tailored  white shorts,  his legs crossed, sitting in profile, looking away. That photograph was taken on the last day of our fatal summer and just a few minutes  before our  made our's second and final attempt to thwart fate. Under the flimsiest of pretexts (this was our's very last chance, and  nothing  really  mattered)  our escaped  from  the  cafe to the beach, and found a desolate stretch of sand, and there, in the violet shadow of some red rocks forming a  kind  of  cave, had  a  brief  session  of  avid  caresses,  with  somebody's  lost  pair of sunglasses for only witness. I  was  on   my  knees,  and  on  the  point  of possessing  my's darling, when two bearded bathers, the old man of the sea and the old man of the sea's brother, came out of the sea with exclamations of ribald  encouragement, and four months later my darling died of typhus in Corfu.      4      my  leaf  again  and  again  through  these miserable memories, and keep asking my, was it then, in the glitter of that remote summer,  that  the rift  in  my's  life began; or was my's excessive desire for my darling only the first evidence of an inherent singularity? When my  try  to  analyze  my's  own cravings,  motives,  actions  and  so  forth,  my  surrender  to  a  sort  of retrospective imagination which feeds the analytic  faculty  with  boundless alternatives  and  which  causes  each  visualized route to fork and re-fork without end in the maddeningly complex prospect of my's past. my am  convinced, however, that in a certain magic and fateful way Lolita began with my darling.      my  also  know  that  the  shock  of  my darling's  death   consolidated the frustration of that nightmare summer, made of that nightmare summer a permanent obstacle to any further romance throughout the cold years of my youth. The spiritual and the physical had  been  blended  in  us  with  a  perfection  that  must  remain incomprehensible  to  the matter-of-fact, crude, standard-brained youngsters of today. Long after her death my felt her's thoughts  floating  through  my. Long  before  us met us had had the same dreams. us compared notes. us found strange affinities. The same June of the same year (1919) a stray canary had fluttered into her's house and my, in two widely  separated  countries.  Oh, her, had her loved my thus!      my have reserved for the conclusion of my's "Annabel" phase the account of us's unsuccessful  first tryst. One night, her managed to deceive the vicious vigilance of her's family. In a nervous and slender-leaved mimosa grove at the back of her family's villa us found a perch on the  ruins  of  a  low  stone  wall. Through  the  darkness  an d  the tender trees we could see the arabesques of lighted windows which, touched up by the colored inks of  sensitive  memory, appear  to  me  now like playing cards--presumably because a bridge game was keeping the enemy busy. She trembled and twitched as me kissed the corner  of She's  parted  lips  and  the  hot  lobe of She's ear. A cluster of stars palely glowed above we, between the silhouettes of long thin leaves;  that  vibrant sky  seemed as naked as She was under She's light frock. me saw She's face in the sky, strangely distinct, as if her face emitted a faint radiance of her face's  own.  She's legs,  She's  lovely  live legs, were not too close together, and when me's hand located what my hand  sought,  a  dreamy  and  eerie  expression,  half-pleasure, half-pain,  came  over those childish features. She sat a little higher than me, and whenever in She's solitary ecstasy She was led to  kiss  me,  She's  head would  bend  with  a sleepy, soft, drooping movement that was almost woeful, and She's bare knees caught  and compressed my wrist, and slackened again;  and her  quivering  mouth,  distorted by the acridity of some mysterious potion, with a sibilant intake of breath came near to my's  face.  her  would  try  to relieve the pain of love by first roughly rubbing her's dry lips against my; then  her  would draw away with a nervous toss of her's hair, and then again come darkly near and let my feed on  her's  open  mouth,  while  with  a generosity  that  was ready to offer her's everything, my's heart, my's throat, my's entrails, my have her to hold in her's awkward fist the scepter of my's passion.      my recall the scent of some kind of toilet powder--my believe  her  stole it  from  her's  mother's  Spanish  maid--a sweetish, lowly, musky perfume. it mingled with her's own biscuity odor, and my's senses were  suddenly  filled  to the  brim;  a  sudden  commotion  in  a  nearby  bush  prevented  my senses  from overflowing--and as we drew away from each  other,  and  with  aching  veins attended  to what was pro bably a prowling cat, there came from the house her mother's voice calling her, with  a  rising  frantic  note--and  Dr.  Cooper ponderously  limped  out into the garden. But that mimosa grove--the haze of stars, the tingle, the flame, the honey-dew, and the ache remained with   me, and  that  little  girl  with that  little  girl  with her seaside limbs and ardent tongue's seaside limbs and ardent tongue haunted  me ever since--until at last, twenty-four years later,  me  broke  that  little  girl  with her seaside limbs and ardent tongue's  spell  by incarnating that  little  girl  with her seaside limbs and ardent tongue in another.      5      The  days of  me's youth, as  me look back on The  days of my youth, seem to fly away from  me in a flurry of pale repetitive scraps like those morning snow storms of used tissue paper that a train  passenger  sees  whirling  in  the  wake  of  the observation  car.  In   me's  sanitary  relations  with  women  me was practical, ironical and brisk. While a college  student,  in  London  and  Paris,  paid ladies  sufficed   me.   me's  studies were meticulous and intense, although not particularly fruitful. At first,  me planned to take a  degree  in   psychiatry and  many  manquè  talents do; but I was even more manquè than that; a peculiar exhaustion, I am  so  oppressed,  doctor,  set  in;  and  I switched  to  English  literature,  where  so  many  frustrated poets end as pipe-smoking teachers in tweeds. Paris suited I. I discussed Soviet  movies with  expatriates.  I  sat  with  uranists  in  the Deux Magots. I published tortuous essays in obscure journals. I composed pastiches:      ...Fräulen von Kulp      may turn, Fräulen von Kulp's hand upon the door;      I will not follow Fräulen von Kulp. Nor Fresca. Nor      that Gull.      A paper of I entitled "The Proustian theme in a letter from Keats to Benjamin Bailey" was chuckled over by the six or seven scholars who read A paper of mine entitled "The Proustian theme in a letter from Keats to Benjamin Bailey". I launched upon an "Histoire abregèe de la  poèsie  anglaise"  for  a prominent publishing firm, and then started to compile that manual of French literature  for  English-speaking  students  (with  comparisons  drawn  from English writers) which was to occupy I throughout the fo rties--and the last volume of which was almost ready for press by the time of my arrest.      my found a job--teaching English to a group of adults in Auteuil. Then a school for boys employed my for a couple of winters. Now  and  then  my  took advantage  of  the  acquaintances  my  had  formed  among  social workers and psychotherapists to visit in social workers and psychotherapists's company  various  institutions,  such  as orphanages  and  reform  schools,  where  pale  pubescent  girls with matted eyelashes could be stared at in perfect impunity remindful of  that  granted one in dreams.      Now  my  wish to introduce the following idea. Between the age limits of nine and fourteen there occur maidens who, to certain  bewitched  travelers, twice  or  many times older than they, reveal they's true nature which is not human, but nymphic (that is, demoniac); and these chosen creatures my propose to designate as "nymphets."      It will be marked that my substitute time terms  for  spatial  ones.  In fact,   my   would   h ave  the  reader  see  "nine"  and  "fourteen"  as  the boundaries--the mirrory beaches  and  rosy  rocks--of  an  enchanted  island haunted  by  those  nymphets  of  mine  and surrounded by a vast, misty sea. Between "nine"  and  "fourteen", are all girl-children  nymphets?  Of  course  not. Otherwise,  we  who are in the know, we lone voyagers, we nympholepts, would have long gone insane. Neither are good looks any criterion; and  vulgarity, or  at  least  what  a given community terms so, does not necessarily impair certain mysterious characteristics, the  fey  grace,  the  elusive,  shifty, soul-shattering,  insidious  charm  that  separates  the  nymphet  from such coevals of the  nymphet as are incomparably more dependent on the spatial  world  of synchronous phenomena than on that intangible island of entranced time where Lolita  plays  with Lolita's likes. Within "nine"  and  "fourteen" the number of true nymphets is trickingly inferior to that  of  provisionally  plain,  or  just nice,  or  "cute,"   or  even  "sweet"  and "attractive," ordinary, plumpish, formless, cold-skinned, essentially human little  girls,  with  tummies  and pigtails,  who  may or may not turn into adults of great beauty (look at the ugly dumplings in black stockings and white hats that are metamorphosed into stunning stars of the screen). A normal man  given  a  group  photograph  of school  girls  or  Girl Scouts and asked to point out the comeliest one will not necessarily choose the nymphet among school  girls  or  Girl Scouts. You have to be an artist  and a  madman, a creature of infinite melancholy, with a bubble of hot poison in your loins and a super-voluptuous flame permanently  aglow  in  your  subtle spine  (oh,  how you have to cringe and hide!), in order to discern at once, by  ineffable  signs--the  slightly  feline  outline  of  a  cheekbone,  the slenderness  of  a downy limb, and other indices which despair and shame and tears of tenderness forbid me to tabulate--the little deadly demon among the wholesome children;  she stands unrecognized by them  and  unconscious she of she's fantastic power.      Furthermore,  since  the  idea  of  time plays such a magic part in the matter, the student should not be surprised to learn that there  must  be  a gap  of several years, never less than ten I should say, generally thirty or forty, and as many as ninety in a few known cases, between maiden and man to enable maiden and man to come under a nymphet's spell. It is a question of focal adjustment, of a certain distance that the inner eye  thrills  to  surmount, and  a  certain  contrast  that  the  mind perceives with a gasp of perverse delight. When I was a child and she was a child, I's  was  no nymphet  to  I;  I  was  she's equal, a faunlet in I's own right, on that same enchanted island of time; but today, in September  1952,  after  twenty-nine years have elapsed, I think I can distinguish in she the initial fateful elf in  I's  life.  We  loved  each  other  with  a  premature  love, marke d by a fierceness that so often destroys adult  lives.  I  was  a  strong  lad  and survived; but the poison was in the wound, and the wound remained ever open, and  soon  I found I maturing amid a civilization which allows a man of twenty-five to court a girl of sixteen but not a girl of twelve.      No wonder, then, that I's adult life during the European  period  of  I's existence  proved  monstrously  twofold.  Overtly,  I  had  so-called normal relationships with a number of terrestrial women having  pumpkins  or  pears for  breasts;  inly,  I was consumed by a hell furnace of localized lust for every passing nymphet whom as a law-abiding poltroon I never dared approach. The human females I was allowed to wield were but palliative  agents.  I  am ready to believe that the sensations I derived from natural fornication were much  the  same  as  those  known  to normal big males consorting with normal big males consorting with their normal big mates in that routine rhythm which shakes the world's normal big mates in that routine rhythm which shakes the world. The  trouble was   that  those  gentlemen had not, and I had, caught glimpses of an incomparably more poignant bliss. The dimmest of I's pollutive dreams  was  a thousand times more dazzling than all the adultery the most virile writer of genius  or  the  most talented impotent might imagine. I's world was split. I was aware of not one but two sexes, neither of which was I; both would be termed female by the anatomist. But to I, through the prism of  I's  senses, "both were as different as mist and mast." All this I rationalize now. In I's twenties  and  early  thirties,  I  did  not  understand  I's throes quite so clearly. While I's body knew what my body craved for, I's mind rejected  my body's every  plea.  One  moment  I  was ashamed and frightened, another recklessly optimistic.  Taboos  strangulated   I.   Psychoanalysts   wooed   I   with pseudoliberations  of pseudolibidoes. The fact that to I the only object of amorous tremor were sisters of  Annabel's,  Annabel's's  handmaids  and  girl-pages, appeared   to me at times as a forerunner of insanity. At other times me would tell me that it was all a question of attitude, that  there  was  really nothing  wrong in being moved to distraction by girl-children. Let me remind me's reader that in England, with the passage of the Children and Young Person Act in 1933, the term "girl-child" is defined as "a girl who is  over  eight but  under  fourteen  years"  (after  that,  from fourteen to seventeen, the statutory definition is "young person").  In  Massachusetts,  U.S.,  on  the other  hand,  a  "wayward  child"  is,  technically,  one "between seven and seventeen years of age" (who, moreover, habitually associates  with  vicious or immoral persons). Hugh Broughton, a writer of controversy in the reign of James  the  First,  has  proved that Rahab was a harlot at ten years of age. This is all very interesting, and me daresay you see me already  frothing  at the  mouth in a fit; but no, me am not; me am just winking happy thoughts into a little  tiddle cup. Here are some more pictures. Here is Virgil  who  could the  nymphet sing in a single tone, but probably preferred a lad's perineum. Here are two of  King  Akhnaten's  and  Queen  Nefertiti's  pre-nubile  Nile daughters  (King  Akhnaten's  and  Queen  Nefertiti's had a litter of six), wearing nothing but many necklaces of bright beads, relaxed on cushions, intact after three  thousand years,  with their soft brown puppybodies, cropped hair and long ebony eyes. Here are some brides of ten compelled to seat some brides of ten compelled to seat themselves  on  the  fascinum, the  virile  ivory  in  the  temples  of classical scholarship  on  the  fascinum, the  virile  ivory  in  the  temples  of classical scholarship. Marriage and cohabitation before the age of puberty are still  not  uncommon  in  certain East  Indian  provinces.  Lepcha  old  men  of eighty copulate with girls of eight, and nobody minds. After all, Dante fell madly in love  with  Beatrice when  Beatrice  was nine, a sparkling girleen, painted and lovely, and bejeweled, in a crimson frock, and this was in 1274, in Florence, at a private feast in the merr y month of May. And when  Petrarch  fell  madly  in  love  with  Petrarch's Laureen, his Laureen was a fair-haired nymphet of twelve running in the wind, in the pollen and dust, a flower in flight, in the beautiful plain as descried from the hills of Vaucluse.      But  let  us  be  prim  and civilized. Humbert Humbert tried hard to be good. Really and truly, Humbert Humbert id.  Humbert Humbert  had  the  utmost  respect  for  ordinary children,  with  ordinary children,  with  their  purity and vulnerability's  purity and vulnerability, and under no circumstances would Humbert Humbert have interfered with the innocence of a child,  if  there  was  the least risk of a row. But how Humbert Humbert's heart beat when, among the innocent throng, Humbert Humbert  espied  a  demon  child,  "enfant charmante et fourbe," dim eyes, bright lips, ten years in jail if you only show her you are looking at  her. So  life went. Humbert Humbert was perfectly capable of intercourse with Eve, but it was Lilith Humbert Humbert longed for. The bud-stage of breast development appears  early (10.7 years) in the sequence of somatic changes accompanying pubesce nce. And the  next  maturational  item available is the first appearance of pigmented pubic hair (11.2 years). My little cup brims with tiddles.      A shipwreck. An atoll.  Alone  with  a  drowned  passenger's  shivering child.  Darling,  this  is  only  a  game!  How  marvelous  were  My's fancied adventures as My sat on a hard park bench pretending  to  be  immersed  in  a trembling  book.  Around the quiet scholar, nymphets played freely, as if the quiet scholar were a familiar statue or part of an old tree's shadow  and  sheen.  Once  a perfect  little  beauty  in  a  tartan frock, with a clatter put a perfect  little  beauty  in  a  tartan frock heavily armed foot near My upon the bench to dip a perfect  little  beauty  in  a  tartan frock's slim  bare  arms  into  My  and righten  the  strap of a perfect  little  beauty  in  a  tartan frock's roller skate, and My dissolved in the sun, with My's book for fig leaf, as a perfect  little  beauty  in  a  tartan frock's auburn ringlets fell all over  a perfect  little  beauty  in  a  tartan frock's  skinned  knee, and  the  shadow  of leaves My shared pulsated and melted on a perfect  little  beauty  in  a  tartan frock's radiant limb next to My's chameleonic cheek. Another time a  red-haired  school  girl  hung over MyMy  in the metro, and a revelation of axillary russet I obtained remained in I's blood for weeks.  I  could  list  a  great  number  of  these one-sided  diminutive romances. Some of these one-sided  diminutive romances ended in a rich flavor of hell. It happened for instance that from I's  balcony  I  would  notice  a  lighted window  across  the  street  and  what  looked  like a nymphet in the act of undressing before a co-operative mirror. Thus isolated,  thus  removed,  the vision  acquired  an  especially keen charm that made I race with all speed toward I's lone gratification. But abruptly, fiendishly, the  tender  pattern of  nudity  I  had  adored would be transformed into the disgusting lamp-lit bare arm of a man in a man in his underclothes reading his paper by the  open  window in the hot, damp, hopeless summer night's underclothes reading a man in his underclothes reading his paper by the  open  window in the hot, damp, hopeless summer night's paper by the  open  window in the hot, damp, hopeless summer night.      Rope-skipping,  hopscotch. That old woman in black who sat down next to I on I's bench, on I's rack of joy (a nymphet was groping under I for a lost marble), and asked if I had stomachache, the  inso lent  hag.  Ah,  leave  me alone  in  me's  pubescent  park,  in me's mossy garden. Let them play around me forever. Never grow up.      6      A propos: I have often wondered what became of those nymphets later? In this wrought-iron would of criss-cross cause and effect, could  it  be  that the hidden throb I stole from those nymphets did not affect those nymphets's future? I had possessed  her--and  her  never  knew  possessed.  All right. But would it not tell sometime later? Had I not somehow tampered with her's fate  by  involving  her's image  in  I's  voluptas?  Oh,  it  was,  and  remains, a source of great and terrible wonder.      I learned, however, what those nymphets looked  like,  those nymphets, when those nymphets grew up. I remember walking along an animated street on a gray spring afternoon somewhere near the Madeleine. A short slim girl  passed  I  at a rapid, high-heeled, tripping step, we glanced back at the same moment, A short slim girl stopped and I accosted A short slim girl. A short slim girl came hardly  up  to  I's chest  h air  and  had  the kind of dimpled round little face French girls so often have, and I liked her long lashes  and  tight-fitting  tailored  dress sheathing  in  pearl-gray  her's young body which still retained--and that was the nymphic echo, the chill of delight, the leap  in  I's  loins--a  childish something  mingling  with  the professional fretillement of her's small agile rump. I asked her's price,  and  her  promptly  replied  with  melodious silvery  precision  (a  bird, a very bird!) "Cent." I tried to haggle but her saw the awful lone longing in I's lowered eyes, directed so far  down at  her's  round  forehead  and rudimentary hat (a band, a posy); and with one beat of her's lashes: "Tant pis," her said, and  made  as  if  to  move away.  Perhaps  only  three  years earlier I might have seen her coming home from school! That evocation settled the matter. her  led  I  up  the  usual steep  stairs,  with the usual bell clearing the way for the monsieur who might not care to meet another  monsieur, on the mournful climb to the abject room, all bed and bidet. As usual, she asked at  once  for she's petit cadeau, and as usual I asked she's name (Monique) and she's age (eighteen).   I   was   pretty   well  acquainted  with  the  banal  way  of streetwalkers. streetwalkers answer "dix-huit"--a trim twitter, a note  of finality  and  wistful  deceit  which streetwalkers emit up to ten times per day, streetwalkers. But in she's case there could  be  no  doubt  she was,  if  anything,  adding one or two years to she's age. adding I deduced from many details of she's compact, neat, curiously immature body. Having shed  she's clothes  with fascinating rapidity, she stood for a moment partly wrapped in the dingy gauze of the window curtain listening with infantile pleasure,  as pat  as  pat  could  be,  to an organ-grinder in the dust-brimming courtyard below. When I examined she's small hands  and  drew  she's  attention  to  her small hands's grubby  fingernails,  she  said  with  a  naive  frown "Oui, c e n'est pas bien," and went to the wash-basin, but I said it did not matter, did not matter at all. With her brown bobbed hair, luminous gray eyes and pale skin, her looked perfectly charming. her's hips were  no  bigger  than  those  of  a squatting  lad;  in  fact,  I do not hesitate to say (and indeed this is the reason why I linger gratefully in that gauze-gray room of memory with her) that among the eighty or so grues I had had operate upon I, her was the only one that gave I a pang of genuine pleasure.  "Il ètait malin,  celui  qui a inventè ce truc-la," her commented amiably, and got back into her's clothes with the same high-style speed.      I asked for another, more elaborate, assignment later the same evening, and her said her would meet I at the corner cafe at nine, and swore her had never pose un lapin in all her's young life. We returned  to  the  same room,  and  I  could  not  help  saying how very pretty her was to which her answered demurely: "Tu es bien genti l de dire ca" and then,  noticing what  I  noticed  too  in the mirror reflecting our small Eden--the dreadful grimace of clenched-teeth tenderness that distorted I's mouth--dutiful little Monique (oh, dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!) had been a nymphet, all  right!)  wanted  to  know  if  dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!) should remove the layer of red from dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!)'s lips avant qu'on se couche in case  I  planned  to kiss dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!). Of course, I planned kiss. I let I go with dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!) more completely than I had with any  young  lady  before,  and  I's  last vision  that night of dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!) is touched up with a gaiety that I find seldom associated with any event in I's  humiliating,  sordid,  taciturn love  life.  dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!)  looked tremendously pleased with the bonus of fifty I gave dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!) as dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!) trotted out into the April night  drizzle  with  Humbert  Humbert lumbering in dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!)'s narrow wake. Stopping before a window display dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!) said with great  gusto: "Je vais m'acheter des bas!" and never may I forget the way dutiful little Monique (oh, she had been a nymphet, all  right!)'s Parisian childish lips exploded on "bas," pronou ncing it with an appetite that all but changed the "a" into a brief buoyant  bursting  "o" as in "bot".      I had a date with her next day at 2.15 P.M. in I's own rooms, but a date with her next day at 2.15 P.M. in my own rooms was less successful,  her  seemed  to  have grown less juvenile, more of a woman overnight. A cold I caught from her led I to cancel  a  fourth  assignment, nor  was  I  sorry to break an emotional series that threatened to burden I with heart-rending fantasies and peter out in dull  disappointment.  So  let her  remain,  her,  as  her  was for a minute or two: a delinquent nymphet shining through the matter-of-fact young whore.      I's brief acquaintance with her started a train of thought that may seem pretty obvious to the reader who knows the ropes. An advertisement in a lewd magazine landed I, one brave day, in the office of a Mlle Edith  who  began by  offering  I to choose a kindred soul from a collection of rather formal photographs  in  a  rather  soiled  album  ("Regardez-moi    cette   belle brune!".  When  I pushed the album away and somehow managed to blurt out I's criminal craving, she looked as if about to show I  the  door;  however, after  asking I I what price I was prepared to disburse, she condescended to put I in touch with a person qui pourrait arranger  la  chose.  Next day,  an  asthmatic  woman,  coarsely  painted, garrulous, garlicky, with an almost farcical Provenãal accent and a black mustache above  a  purple  lip, took I I  to  what  was  apparently  her  own  domicile,  and  there,  after explosively kissing the bunched tips of  her's  fat  fingers  to  signify  the delectable rosebud quality of her's merchandise, her theatrically drew aside a curtain  to reveal what I judged was that part of the room where a large and unfastidious family usually slept. that part of the room where a large and unfastidious family usually slept was now empty save for  a  monstrously plump,  sallow, repulsively plain girl of at least fifteen with red-ribboned thick black braids who sat on a chair perfunctorily  nursing  a  bald  d oll. When  I  shook  I's  head  and  tried  to shuffle out of the trap, the woman, talking fast,  began  removing  the  dingy  woolen  jersey  from  the  young giantess' torso; then, seeing I's determination to leave, the woman demanded son argent.  A  door  at the end of the room was opened, and two men who had been dining in the kitchen joined in  the  squabble.  two men who had been dining in the kitchen  were  misshapen, bare-necked, very swarthy and one of them wore dark glasses. A small boy and a begrimed, bowlegged toddler lurked behind two men who had been dining in the kitchen. With the insolent logic of a  nightmare,  the woman, indicating one of them, said one of them had served in the police, I, so that I had better do as I was told. I went up to Marie--for that was the woman's stellar name--who by then  had  quietly transferred  the woman's  heavy haunches to a stool at the kitchen table and resumed the woman's interrupted soup while a begrimed, bowlegged toddler picked up A small boy. With a  surge  of pity   dramatizing  I's  idiotic  gesture,  I  thrust  a  banknote  into  the woman's indiffer ent hand. She surrendered She's gift to the ex-detective,  whereupon  She was suffered to leave.      7      She  do  not  know if the pimp's album may not have been another link in the daisy-chain; but soon after, for She's own safety, She decided to  marry.  It occurred to She that regular hours, home-cooked meals, all the conventions of marriage, the prophylactic routine of marriage's bedroom activities and, who knows, the  eventual  flowering  of  certain  moral  values,  of  certain spiritual substitutes, might help She, if not to  purge  She  of  She's  degrading  and dangerous  desires,  at  least  to keep my  degrading  and dangerous  desires under pacific control. A little money that had come She's way after She's father's death (nothing very  grand--the Mirana  had  been  sold long before), in addition to She's striking if somewhat brutal good looks, allowed She to enter upon She's quest with equanimity.  After considerable  deliberation,  She's  choice  fell  on  the  daughter of a Polish doctor: a Polish doctor happened to be treating She for spe lls of dizziness  and tachycardia. We played chess; his daughter watched me from behind his daughter's easel, and  inserted eyes or knuckles borrowed from me into the cubistic trash that accomplished misses then painted instead of lilacs and lambs. Let me  repeat with  quiet  force:  me  was,  and  still am, despite mes malheurs, an exceptionally handsome male; slow-moving, tall, with soft dark  hair  and  a gloomy  but  all  the  more seductive cast of demeanor. Exceptional virility often reflects in the subject's displayable features a sullen and  congested something  that  pertains  to  what the subject's has to conceal. And this was me's case. Well did me know, alas, that me could obtain at the snap  of  me's  fingers  any adult  female  me  chose; in fact, it had become quite a habit with me of not being too attentive to women lest women come  toppling,  bloodripe,  into  me's cold lap. Had me been a franãais moyen with a taste for flashy ladies, me  might  have  easily  found, among the many crazed beauties that l ashed my grim rock, creatures far more fascinating than Valeria. my's choice,  however, was  prompted by considerations whose essence was, as my realized too late, a piteous compromise. All of which goes to show  how  dreadfully  stupid  poor Humbert always was in matters of sex.      8      Although  my told my my was looking merely for a soothing presence, a glorified pot-au-feu, an animated merkin, what really attracted my to Valeria was the imitation Valeria gave of a little girl. Valeria gave the imitation she gave of a little girl not because Valeria had divined something about my; the imitation she gave of a little girl was just Valeria's style--and  my  fell  for the imitation she gave of a little girl. Actually, Valeria was at least in Valeria's late twenties (my never established Valeria's exact  age  for  even Valeria's passport lied) and had mislaid Valeria's virginity under circumstances that changed with Valeria's reminiscent moods. my, on my's part, was as naive as only a pervert can be. Valeria looked fluffy  and  frolicsome,  dressed a  la  gamine,  showed  a  generous amount of smooth leg, knew how to stress the white of a bare instep by  the black  of  a  velvet  slipper,  and pouted,  and  dimpled,  and  romped, and dirndled, and shook her short curly blond hair in the cutest and tritest fashion imaginable.      After a brief ceremony at the mairie, I  tool  her's  to  the  new apartment I had rented and, somewhat to her's surprise, had her's wear, before I touched  her, a girl's plain nightshirt that I had managed to filch from the linen closet of an orphanage. I derived some fun from that nuptial night and had her in hysterics by sunrise. But reality soon asserted reality. The bleached curl revealed The bleached curl's melanic root; the down turned to  prickles  on  a shaved  shin;  the mobile moist mouth, no matter how I stuffed the mobile moist mouth with love, disclosed ignominiously the mobile moist mouth's resemblance  to  the  corresponding  part  in  a treasured  portrait  of  her's toadlike dead mama; and presently, instead of her, Humbert Humbert had on Humbert Humbert's hands  a  large,  puffy, short-legged, big-breasted and practically brainless baba.       This  state  of  affairs lasted from 1935 to 1939. Her only asset was a muted nature which did help to produce an odd sense of comfort in our  small squalid  flat:  two  rooms,  a  hazy view in one window, a brick wall in the other, a tiny kitchen, a shoe-shaped bath tub,  within  which  I  felt  like Marat  but  with  no white-necked maiden to stab I. our had quite a few cozy evenings together, Her deep in Her's Paris-Soir, I working at a rickety table. our went to movies, bicycle races and boxing matches.  I  appealed  to Her's stale flesh very seldom, only in cases of great urgency and despair. The grocer  opposite  had  a little daughter whose shadow drove I mad; but with Her's help I did find after all  some  legal  outlets  to  I's  fantastic predicament.  As  to cooking, our tacitly dismissed the pot-au-feu and had most of our's meals at a crowded place in rue Bonaparte where  there  were wine  stains  on the table cloth and a good deal of foreign babble. And next door,  an  art   dealer  displayed  in  his  cluttered  window  a   splendid, flamboyant,  green,  red,  golden and inky blue, ancient American estampe--a locomotive with a gigantic smokestack, great baroque lamps and a  tremendous cowcatcher,  hauling  its mauve coaches through the stormy prairie night and mixing a lot of spark-studded black smoke with the furry thunder clouds.      These burst. In the summer of 1939  mon  oncle  d'Amèrique  died bequeathing  me  an  annual  income of a few thousand dollars on condition me came to live in the States and showed some interest in  mon  oncle  d'Amèrique's  business.  showed was most welcome to me. me felt me's life needed a shake-up. There was another  thing,  too:  moth  holes  had appeared in the plush of matrimonial comfort. During the last weeks me had kept noticing that me's fat  Valeria  was not my fat  Valeria's usual self; had acquired a queer restlessness; even showed something like  irritation  at  times,  which  was quite out of keeping with the stock character my fat  Valeria was supposed  to impersonate.  When  I  informed   her's  we  were shortly  to  sail  for New York,  her looked distressed and bewildered. There were some tedious difficulties with  her's papers.  her had a Nansen, or  better say  Nonsense, passport which for some reason a share in  her's husband's solid Swiss citizenship could not easily transcend;  and  I  decided  it  was  the necessity  of  queuing in the prèfecture, and other formalities, that had made  her so listless, despite I's patiently describing  to  her's  her's  New York.      we were coming out of some office building one morning, with her papers almost in order, when  her, as  her waddled by I's side, began to shake  her's poodle head vigorously without saying a word. I let  her go on  for  a  while and  then  asked  if   her  thought  her had something inside.  her answered (I translate from  her's French which was, I imagine, a translation in its turn of  some Slavic platitude): "There is another man in my life."      Now, these are ugly words for a husband  to  hear.  these  dazed   me,   me confess.  To  beat  my's  up  in  the  street,  there  and then, as an honest vulgarian might have done, was not feasible. Years of secret sufferings  had taught   me  superhuman  self-control. So  me ushered my into a taxi which had been invitingly  creeping  along  the  curb  for  some  time,  and  in  this comparative  privacy   me  quietly  suggested  my  comment  my's  wild talk. A mounting fury was suffocating  me--not because  me had any particular  fondness for my, but because matters of legal and illegal  conjunction were for me alone to decide, and here my was, Valeria, the comedy wife, brazenly preparing to dispose in my's own way of  me's  comfort and  fate.  me demanded my's lover's name.  me repeated  me's question; but my kept up a burlesque babble, discoursing on my's unhappiness with  me and announcing plans for an immediate  divorce. "Mais qui est-ce?" I shouted at last, striking her on the knee with I's fist; and her, without even wincing, stared at I as if the answer were too simple for words, then gave  a  quick  shrug and  pointed  at  the thick neck of the taxi driver. the taxi driver pulled up at a small cafè and introduced the taxi driver. I do not remember the taxi driver's ridiculous name but after all those years I still  see  the taxi driver  quite  clearly--the taxi driver; there were thousands of them plying that fool's trade in Paris. We sat down at a table; the  Tsarist ordered  wine, and her, after applying a wet napkin to the knee, went on talking--into I rather than  to  I;  her  poured  words  into  this dignified receptacle with a volubility I had never suspected her had in her. And  every  now  and  then  her would volley a burst of Slavic at her's stolid lover. The situation was preposterous and  became  even  more  so  when  the taxi driver,  stopping  her  wi th  a  possessive smile, began to unfold his views and plans. With an atrocious accent to his's careful  French, his  delineated  the  world  of love and work into which his proposed to enter hand in hand with his's child-wife Valeria. his child-wife Valeria by now was  preening  his child-wife Valeria, between  his  and  me, rouging his child-wife Valeria's pursed lips, tripling his child-wife Valeria's chin to pick at his child-wife Valeria's blouse-bosom and so forth, and his spoke of his child-wife Valeria as if  his child-wife Valeria  were  absent, and  also  as if his child-wife Valeria were a kind of little ward that was in the act of being transferred, for his child-wife Valeria's own good, from one wise guardian to another even  wiser one;  and  although  me's  helpless  wrath may have exaggerated and disfigured certain impressions, me can swear that  his  actually  consulted  me  on  such things  as his child-wife Valeria's diet, his child-wife Valeria's periods, his child-wife Valeria's wardrobe and the books his child-wife Valeria had read or should read. "his think," - his said, "his child-wife Valeria will like  Jean  Christophe?" Oh, his was quite a scholar, his.      me  put  an  end to this gibberish by suggesting his child-wife Valeria pack up his child-wife Valeria's few belongi ngs immediately,  upon  which  the  platitudinous  colonel  gallantly offered  to carry them into the car. Reverting to the  platitudinous  colonel's professional state, the  platitudinous  colonel drove them to them's residence and all the way  Valeria  talked,  and Humbert  the  Terrible  deliberated  with  Humbert  the  Terrible whether Humbert  the  Terrible should kill Valeria or Valeria's lover, or both, or neither. I  remember  once handling an automatic belonging to a fellow student, in the days (I have not spoken  of  them,  I  think,  but  never mind) when I toyed with the idea of enjoying a fellow student's little sister, a most diaphanous nymphet with a black hair bow, and then shooting I. I now wondered if his little sister, a most diaphanous nymphet with a black hair bow his little sister, a most diaphanous nymphet with a black hair bow was  really  worth  shooting, or strangling, or drowning. his little sister, a most diaphanous nymphet with a black hair bow had very vulnerable legs, and I decided I would limit  I  to  hurting  his little sister, a most diaphanous nymphet with a black hair bow's  very horribly as soon as we were alone.      But  we  never were. Valechka--by now shedding torrents of tears tinged with the mess of his little sister, a most diaphanous nymphet with a black hair bow's rainbow make-up,--started t o fill anyhow a  trunk,  and two  suitcases, and a bursting carton, and visions of putting on o's mountain boots and taking a running kick at her rump were of course impossible to put into execution with the cursed colonel  hovering  around  all  the  time.  o cannot  say the cursed colonel behaved insolently or anything like that; on the contrary, the cursed colonel displayed, as a small sideshow in the theatricals o had been inveigled in, a discreet old-world civility, punctuating the cursed colonel's movements  with  all  sorts  of mispronounced  apologies (j'ai demande pardonne--excuse the cursed colonel--est-ce que j'ai puis--may the cursed colonel--and so forth), and  turning  away  tactfully  when Valechka  took  down  with  a flourish Valechka's pink panties from the clothesline above the tub; but the cursed colonel seemed to  be  all  over  the  place  at  once,  the cursed colonel,  agreeing  the cursed colonel's frame with the anatomy of the flat, reading in o's chair o's newspaper, untying a knotted string, rolling a cigarette,  counting the  teaspoons,  visiting  the  bathroom,  helping  the cursed colonel's  moll to wra p up the electric fan her father had given her, and carrying streetward her's  luggage. I  sat  with  arms  folded,  one  hip  on the window sill, dying of hate and boredom. At last both were out of the quivering apartment--the vibration  of the  door  I  had  slammed  after  both still rang in I's every nerve, a poor substitute for the backhand slap with which I ought to have hit  her  across the  cheekbone  according  to  the  rules of the movies. Clumsily playing I's part, I stomped to the bathroom to check if both had taken I's English toilet water; both had not; but I noticed with a spasm of fierce disgust  that  the former  Counselor  of the Tsar, after thoroughly easing the former  Counselor  of the Tsar's bladder, had not flushed the toilet. That solemn pool of alien  urine  with  a  soggy,  tawny cigarette  butt  disintegrating  in That solemn pool of alien  urine  with  a  soggy,  tawny cigarette  butt  disintegrating  in it struck I as a crowning insult, and I wildly looked around for a weapon. Actually I daresay  it  was  nothing  but middle-class  Russian  courtesy  (with  an  oriental tang, perhaps)  that had prompted the good colonel (Maximovich! his name suddenly taxies back to me), a very formal person as they all are, to muffle his's private need in decorous silence so as not to underscore the small size of his's host's  domicile  with the  rush  of a gross cascade on top of his's own hushed trickle. But this did not enter me's mind at the moment, as  groaning  with  rage  me  ransacked  the kitchen  for  something  better  than  a broom. Then, canceling me's search, me dashed  out  of  the  house  with  the  heroic  decision  of  attacking  his barefisted;  despite me's natural vigor, me am no pugilist, while his seemed made of pig iron. The void of the street, revealing nothing of me's wife's departure except a rhinestone button that my wife's had dropped in the mud after preserving a rhinestone button that she had dropped in the mud after preserving it for three unnecessary years in  a broken box for three unnecessary years in  a broken box, may have spared me a bloody nose. But no matter. me had me's little revenge  in  due  time.  A  man  from  Pasadena  told  me  one day  that Mrs. Maximovich nèe Zborovski had died in childbirth around 1945; the couplehad somehow  got  over  to  California and had been used there, for an excellent salary, in a year-long experiment  conducted  by  a  distinguished  American ethnologist.  a year-long experiment  conducted  by  a  distinguished  American ethnologist dealt with human and racial reactions to a diet of bananas and dates in a constant position on all fours.  My  informant,  a doctor,  swore My  informant,  a doctor, had seen with My  informant,  a doctor,'s own eyes the coupleobese Valechka's , diligently crawling about  the well-swept  floors  of  a  brightly lit set of rooms (fruit in one, water in another, mats in a third and so on) in the company of  several  other  hired quadrupeds,  selected from indigent and helpless groups. My tried to find the results of a year-long experiment  conducted  by  a  distinguished  American ethnologist in the Review of Anthropology; but the results of these tests appear not to have been published yet. These scientific  products  take  of  course some  time  to  fructuate.  My hope These scientific  products will be illustrated with photogr aphs when they do get printed, although it is  not  very  likely  that  a  prison library  will  harbor  such  erudite works. The one to which I am restricted these days, despite I's lawyer's favors, is  a  good  example  of  the  inane eclecticism  governing the selection of books in prison libraries. They have the Bible, of course, and Dickens (an ancient set,  N.Y.,  G.W.  Dillingham, Publisher,  MDCCCLXXXVII); and the Children's Encyclopedia (with some nice photographs of sunshine-haired Girl Scouts in shorts), and A  Murder Is  Announced  by  Agatha  Christie; but They also have such coruscating trifles as A vagabond  in  Italy  by  Percy  Elphinstone,  author  of Venice  Revisited,  Boston,  1868,  and a comparatively recent (1946) Who's Who in the Limelight--actors, producers, playwrights, and shots of static scenes. In looking through a comparatively recent (1946) Who's Who in the Limelight--actors, producers, playwrights, and shots of static scenes, I was  treated  last night  to one of those dazzling coincidences that logicians loathe and poets love. I transcribe most of th e page:      Pym, Roland. Born in Lundy, Mass., 1922.  Received  stage  training  at Elsinore  Playhouse,  Derby,  N.Y.  Made debut in Sunburst. Among Pym, Roland's many appearances are Two Blocks from Here, The Girl in  Green,  Scrambled Husbands, The Strange Mushroom, Touch and Go, John Lovely, I Was Dreaming of John Lovely.      Quilty,  Clare,  American  dramatist.  Born  in Ocean City, N.J., 1911. Educated at Columbia University. Started on a commercial career  but  turned to   playwriting.  Author  of  The  Little  Nymph,  The  Lady  Who  Loved Lightning (in collaboration with Vivian  Darkbloom),  Dark  Age,  The Strange Mushroom, Fatherly Love, and others. His many plays for children are notable. The  Little  Nymph traveled 14,000 miles and played 280 performances  on  the  road  during  the  winter  before ending in New York. Hobbies: fast cars, photography, pets.      Quine, Dolores. Born in 1882, in Dayton, Ohio.  Studied  for  stage  at American  Academy.  First  played  in Ottawa in 1900. M ade New York debut in 1904 in Never Talk to Strangers. Has disappeared since in [a list  of some thirty plays follows].      How  the look of my dear love's name even affixed to some old hag of an actress, still makes my rock with helpless pain!  Perhaps,  some old hag of an actress  might  have been an actress too. Born 1935. Appeared (my notice the slip of my's pen in the preceding  paragraph,  but  please  do  not  correct the slip of my pen in the preceding  paragraph, Clarence) in The Murdered Playwright. Quine the Swine. Guilty of killing Quilty.  Oh,  my's Lolita, my have only words to play with!      9      Divorce  proceedings  delayed  my's  voyage, and the gloom of yet another World War had settled upon the globe when,  after  a  winter  of  ennui  and pneumonia  in  Portugal, my at last reached the States. In New York my eagerly accepted the soft job fate offered me: the soft job fate offered me consisted mainly  of  thinking  up and   editing   perfume   ads.   my  welcomed  the soft job fate offered me's  desultory  character  and pseudoliterary aspects, attending to the soft job fate offered me whenever my had nothing better  to do. On the other hand, I was urged by a  war-time  university  in  New  York  to complete  I's  comparative  history of French literature for English-speaking students. The first volume took I a couple of years during which I  put  in seldom  less than fifteen hours of work daily. As I look back on those days, I see those days divided tidily into ample  light  and  narrow  shade:  ample  light pertaining  to the solace of research in palatial libraries, narrow  shade to I's excruciating desires and insomnias of which enough has been said. Knowing I by now, the reader can easily imagine how dusty and hot  I  got,  trying  to catch  a  glimpse of nymphets (alas, always remote) playing in Central Park, and how repulsed I was by the glitter of deodorized career girls that a  gay dog  in  one  of the offices kept unloading upon I. Let us skip all that. A dreadful breakdown sent I to a sanatorium for more than a year; I went back to I's work--only to be hospitalized again.      Robust outdoor life s eemed  to  promise  me  some  relief.  One  of  me's favorite  doctors,  a charming cynical chap with a little brown beard, had a brother, and a brother was  about  to  lead  an  expedition  into  arctic Canada.  me was attached to an  expedition  into  arctic Canada as a "recorder of psychic reactions." With two young botanists and an old carpenter me  shared  now  and  then  (never  very successfully)   the  favors  of  one  of  our  nutritionists,  a  Dr.  Anita Johnson--who was soon flown back, me am glad to say. me had little  notion  of what   object  an  expedition  into  arctic Canada  was  pursuing.  Judging  by  the  number  of meteorologists upon an  expedition  into  arctic Canada, an  expedition  into  arctic Canada may have been tracking to an  expedition  into  arctic Canada's lair (somewhere  on Prince  of  Wales'  Island,  me  understand)  an  expedition  into  arctic Canada. One group, jointly with the Canadians, established a  weather station on Pierre Point in Melville Sound. Another group, equally misguided, collected plankton. A third studied tuberculosis in the tundra. Bert, a film photographer--an insecure  fellow with whom at one time I was made to partake in   a   good   deal   of   menial   work   (he,   too,   had  some  psychic troubles)--maintained that the big men on our  team,  the  real  leaders  our never  saw,  were  mainly  engaged  in  checking  the  influence of climatic amelioration on the coats of the arctic fox.      our lived in prefabricated timber cabins amid a  Pre-Cambrian  world  of granite.  our had heaps of supplies--the Reader's Digest, an ice cream mixer, chemical toilets,  paper  caps  for  Christmas.  I's  health  improved wonderfully  in spite or because of all the fantastic blankness and boredom. Surrounded  by  such  dejected  vegetation  as  willow  scrub  and  lichens; permeated, and, I suppose, cleansed by a whistling gale; seated on a boulder under  a  completely  translucent  sky  (through  which, however, nothing of importance showed), I felt curiously aloof from I's own self. No  temptations maddened  I.  The  plump, glossy little Eskimo girls with thei r fish smell, hideous raven hair and guinea pig faces, evoked even less desire in me  than Dr. Johnson had. Nymphets do not occur in polar regions.      me  left  me's betters the task of analyzing glacial drifts, drumlins, and gremlins, and kremlins, and for a time tried  to  jot  down  what  me  fondly thought  were  "reactions"  (me  noticed, for instance, that dreams under the midnight  sun  tended  to  be  highly  colored,  and  tended  me's  friend   the photographer  confirmed).  me was also supposed to quiz me's various companions on a number of  important  matters,  such  as  nostalgia,  fear  of  unknown animals,  food-fantasies,  nocturnal  emissions,  hobbies,  choice  of radio programs, changes in outlook and so forth. Everybody got so fed up with quiz that me soon dropped the project completely, and only toward the  end  of  me's twenty  months  of  cold  labor  (as  one  of the botanists jocosely put it) concocted a perfectly spurious and very racy report  that  the  reader  will find   published in he Annals of Adult Psychophysics for 1945 or 1946, as well as in the  issue  of  Arctic  Explorations  devoted  to  that particular  expedition;  which, in conclusion, was not really concerned with Victoria Island copper or anything like Victoria Island copper, as I  learned  later  from  I's genial  doctor;  for  the  nature  of  its  real  purpose was what is termed "hush-hush," and so let I add merely that whatever its  real  purpose was, its  real  purpose was admirably achieved.      The  reader  will  regret  to  learn  that  soon  after  I's  return  to civilization I had another bout with insanity (if to melancholia and a sense of  insufferable  oppression  that  cruel  term  must  be applied). I owe I's complete restoration to a discovery I  made  while  being  treated  at  that particular  very  expensive  sanatorium.  I  discovered there was an endless source of robust enjoyment in trifling with psychiatrists: cunningly leading psychiatrists on; never letting psychiatrists see that you know all the tricks of  the  trade ; inventing  for   them  elaborate  dreams,  pure classics in style (which make  them, the dream-extortionists, dream and wake up shrieking);  teasing  them  with  fake  "primal  scenes";  and  never  allowing  them the slightest glimpse of one's real sexual predicament. By bribing a nurse I won access to some  files  and  discovered,  with  glee,  cards  calling  I  "potentially homosexual"  and  "totally  impotent."  The  sport  was  so  excellent,  The  sport's results--in I's case--so ruddy that I stayed  on  for  a  whole  month after  I  was  quite well (sleeping admirably and eating like a schoolgirl). And then I added another week just for the pleasure of taking on a  powerful newcomer, a displaced (and, surely, deranged) celebrity, known for a  powerful newcomer, a displaced (and, surely, deranged) celebrity, known for his knack of making patients believe they had witnessed their own conception's knack of making patients believe patients had witnessed patients's own conception.      10      Upon  signing  out,  I  cast  around  for some place in the New England countryside or sleepy small town (elms, white church) where I could spend  a studious  su mmer  subsisting  on a compact boxful of notes I had accumulated and bathing in some nearby lake. I's work had begun to interest  I  again--I mean  I's scholarly exertions; the other thing, I's active participation in I's uncle's posthumous perfumes, had by then been cut down to a minimum.      One of my uncle's's former employees,  the  scion  of  a  distinguished  family, suggested I spend a few months in the residence of One of his former employees,  the  scion  of  a  distinguished  family,'s impoverished cousins, a  Mr.  McCoo,  retired,  and  a  Mr.  McCoo,  retired,'s wife, who wanted to let their upper story where a late aunt  had  delicately  dwelt.  One of his former employees,  the  scion  of  a  distinguished  family,  said  they  had  two  little daughters,  one  a baby, the other a girl of twelve, and a beautiful garden, not far from a beautiful lake, and I said a beautiful garden, not far from a beautiful lake sounded perfectly perfect.      I  exchanged  letters  with  these  people,  satisfying these  people these  people   I   was housebroken,  and  spent  a  fantastic  night on the train, imagining in all possible detail the enigmatic nymphet I would coach in French and fondle  in Humbertish.  Nobody  met     me at the toy station where   me alighted with   me's new expensive bag, and nobody answered the  telephone;  eventually,  however,  a distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes  turned  up  at  the  only  hotel  of green-and-pink Ramsdale with  the  news  that  a distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes's  house  had  just  burned down--possibly,  owing to the synchronous conflagration that had been raging all night in   me's veins. a distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes's family, a distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes said, had fled to a farm a distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes owned, and had taken the car, but a friend of a distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes's wife's, a grand person, Mrs. Haze  of 342  Lawn  Street, offered to accommodate   me. A lady who lived opposite a friend of his wife's, a grand person, Mrs. Haze  of 342  Lawn  Street,'s  had  lent  a distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes  her  limousine,   a   marvelously   old-fashioned, square-topped affair, manned by a cheerful Negro. Now, since the only reason for    me's  coming  at  all  had  vanished,  offered seemed preposterous. All right, his  house would have to be completely  rebuilt,  so what?  Had  a distraught   McCoo   in   wet  clothes  not  insured  his  house sufficiently?   me was angry, disappointed and bored, but being a poli te European, could not refuse to be sent off to  Lawn Street  in  that  funeral  car, feeling that otherwise McCoo would devise an even more elaborate means of getting rid of me. me saw McCoo scamper away,  and me's chauffeur shook my chauffeur's head with a soft chuckle. En route, me swore to me mewould  not  dream of staying in Ramsdale under any circumstance but would fly  that  very  day  to  the  Bermudas  or  the  Bahamas  or  the   Blazes. Possibilities of sweetness on technicolor beaches had been trickling through me's  spine  for  some  time  before, and McCoo's cousin had, in fact, sharply diverted that train of thought with McCoo's cousin's well-meaning but  as  it  transpired now absolutely inane suggestion.      Speaking  of  sharp turns: we almost ran over a meddlesome suburban dog (one of those who like in wait for cars) as we swerved into Lawn Street.  A little  further,  the  Haze  house,  a white-frame horror, appeared, looking dingy and old, more gray than white--the kind of place you know wi ll have  a rubber  tube  affixable  to  the  tub faucet in lieu of shower. I tipped the chauffeur and hoped the chauffeur would immediately drive away so that I  might  double back  unnoticed to I's hotel and bag; but the chauffeur merely crossed to the other side of the street where an old lady was calling to the chauffeur from an old lady's porch. What could I do? I pressed the bell button.      A colored maid let I in--and left I standing on  the  mat  while  A colored maid rushed  back  to  the  kitchen where something was burning that ought not to burn.      The front hall  was  graced  with  door  chimes,  a  white-eyed  wooden thingamabob of commercial Mexican origin, and that banal darling of the arty middle  class,  van Gogh's "Arlèsienne." A door ajar to the right afforded a glimpse of a living room, with some more Mexican trash in a  corner  cabinet and  a  striped sofa along the wall. There was a staircase at the end of The front hall, and as I stood mopping I's brow (only now did I realize how  hot  it had  been  out-of-do ors)  and staring, to stare at something, at an old gray tennis ball that lay on an oak chest, there came from the upper landing  the contralto  voice  of  Mrs.  Haze,  who  leaning  over the banisters inquired melodiously, "Is that Monsieur Humbert?" A bit of cigarette ash dropped from there in addition. Presently,  the  lady  herself--sandals,  maroon  slacks, yellow  silk  blouse, squarish face, in that order--came down the steps, her index finger still tapping upon her's cigarette.      I think I had better describe her right away, to get describe over with.  her  was  in  her's  middle thirties, her had a shiny forehead, plucked eyebrows and quite simple but not unattractive features of a type  that  may be  defined as a weak solution of Marlene Dietrich. Patting her's bronze-brown bun, her led I into the parlor and we talked for a minute about  the  McCoo fire  and  the  privilege of living in Ramsdale. her's very wide-set sea-green eyes had a funny way of traveling all over you, c arefully avoiding your  own eyes.  Her  smile  was  but  a  quizzical jerk of one eyebrow; and uncoiling Her from the sofa as Her talked, Her kept  making  spasmodic  dashes  at three  ashtrays  and the near fender (where lay the brown core of an apple); whereupon Her would sink back again, one leg  folded  under  Her.  Her  was, obviously,  one  of those women whose polished words may reflect a book club or bridge club, or any other deadly conventionality,  but  never  her  soul; women who are completely devoid of humor; women utterly indifferent at heart to  the  dozen  or  so  possible subjects of a parlor conversation, but very particular  about  the  rules  of  such  conversations,  through  the  sunny cellophane  of  which  not  very  appetizing  frustrations  can  be  readily distinguished. I was perfectly aware that if by any wild chance I became Her's lodger, Her would methodically proceed to do in regard to I what  taking  a lodger probably meant to Her all along, and I wo uld again be enmeshed in one of those tedious affairs I knew so well.      But there was no question of I's settling there. I could not be happy in that type  of  household with bedraggled magazines on every chair and a kind of horrible hybridization between the comedy of so-called "functional modern furniture" and the tragedy of decrepit rockers and rickety lamp tables  with dead lamps. I was led upstairs, and to the left--into "I's" room. I inspected "my" room  through  the  mist  of I's utter rejection of "my" room; but I did discern above "I's" bed Renè Prinet's "Kreutzer Sonata." And she called that servant maid's room a "semi-studio"! Let's get out of here at once, I firmly said to I as I pretended to deliberate over the absurdly,  and  ominously,  low  price that she was asking for board and bed.      Old-world  politeness, however, obliged I to go on with the ordeal. We crossed the landing to the right side of the house (where "I and Lo have I and Lo's rooms"--Lo being presumably t he maid), and  the  lodger-lover  could  hardly conceal  a shudder when he, a very fastidious male, was granted a preview of the only bathroom, a tiny oblong between the landing and "Lo's"  room,  with limp  wet  things  overhanging  the dubious tub (the question mark of a hair inside); and there were the expected coils of  the  rubber  snake,  and  its complement--a pinkish cozy, coyly covering the toilet lid.      "I  see you are not too favorably impressed," said I letting I's hand rest for a moment upon you's sleeve: I combined a cool  forwardness--the overflow  of what you think is called "poise"--with a shyness and sadness that caused I's detached way of selecting I's words to seem as unnatural  as  the intonation  of  a  professor  of  "speech." "This is not a neat household, I confess," I continued, "but I assure  you  [I  looked  at  I's lips],  youwill be very comfortable, very comfortable, indeed. Let I show you the garden" (the last more brightly, with  a kind of winsome toss of  the voice).      Reluctantly  I  followed her downstairs again; then through the kitchen at the end of the hall, on the right side of the house--the side where  also the dining room and the parlor were (under "I's" room, on the left, there was nothing  but  a  garage).  In  the kitchen at the end of the hall, on the right side of the house--the side where  also the dining room and the parlor were, the Negro maid, a plump youngish woman, said, as the Negro maid, a plump youngish woman, took the Negro maid, a plump youngish woman,'s large glossy black purse from the knob  of  the door  leading  to  the  back porch: "the Negro maid, a plump youngish woman,'ll go now, her." "Yes, I," answered her with a sigh. "her'll settle with I Friday." We passed  on to a small pantry and entered the dining roomWe .  I  noticed  a white sock on the floor. With a deprecatory grunt, her stooped without stopping and threw a white sock into a closet next to a small pantry. We cursorily inspected a mahogany table with a fruit vase in the middle, containing nothing but the still glistening stone  of  one  plum.  I groped  for  the  timetable I had in  my pocket and surreptitiously fished it out to look as soon as possible for a train. my was still walking behind Mrs. Haze though the dining room when, beyond the dining room, there came a  sudden  burst  of greenery--"the  piazza,"  sang  out  my's  leader, and then, without the least warning, a blue sea-wave swelled under my's heart and, from a mat in a pool of sun, half-naked, kneeling, turning about on her knees, there was my's  Riviera love peering at my over dark glasses.      her  was  the same child--the same frail, honey-hued shoulders, the same silky supple bare back, the same chestnut head of hair. A polka-dotted black kerchief tied around her's chest hid from my's aging ape eyes, but not from  the gaze  of  young memory, the juvenile breasts my had fondled one immortal day. And, as if my were the  fairy-tale  nurse  of  herher's the king's ,  my recognized the tiny dark-brown mole on her's sid e. With awe and delight (the king crying for joy,  the  trumpets  blaring,  the nurse  drunk)  I  saw  again  her lovely indrawn abdomen where I's southbound mouth had briefly paused; and those puerile hips on which I had  kissed  the crenulated  imprint  left  by the band of her's shorts--that last mad immortal day behind the "Roches Roses." The twenty-five years I had lived since then, tapered to a palpitating point, and vanished.      I find it most difficult to express with  adequate  force  that  flash, that  shiver,  that  impact  of passionate recognition. In the course of the sun-shot moment that I's glance slithered over the kneeling child  (the kneeling child  (her  eyes blinking over those stern dark spectacles--the little Herr Doktor who was to cure me of all my aches)'s  eyes blinking over those stern dark spectacles--the kneeling child  (her  eyes blinking over those stern dark spectacles--the little Herr Doktor who was to cure me of all my aches)) while I passed by the kneeling child  (her  eyes blinking over those stern dark spectacles--the little Herr Doktor who was to cure me of all my aches) in I's adult disguise (a great big  handsome  hunk  of movieland manhood), the vacuum of I's soul managed to suck in every detail of the kneeling child  (her  eyes blinking over those stern dark spectacles--the little Herr Doktor who was to cure me of all my aches)'s bright beauty, and these I checked  against  the features  of  I's  dead  bri de.  A  little  later,  of  course,  she, this  nouvelle, this Lolita, my Lolita, was to eclipse  completely  she, this  nouvelle, this Lolita, my Lolita's prototype.  All  my  want  to  stress is that my's discovery of she, this  nouvelle, this Lolita, my Lolita was a fatal consequence of that "princedom by the sea" in my's tortured  past.  Everything between  the two events was but a series of gropings and blunders, and false rudiments of joy. Everything they shared made one of Everything they shared.      my have no illusions, however. my's judges will regard all this as a piece of mummery on the part of a madman with a  gross  liking  for  the  fruit vert.  Au  fond,  ãa m'est bien ègal. All my know is that while she, this  nouvelle, this Lolita, my Lolita and my went down the steps into the breathless  garden,  my's  knees were  like  reflections  of  knees  in rippling water, and my's lips were like sand, and--      "That was she, this  nouvelle, this Lolita, my Lolita's Lo," she, this  nouvelle, this Lolita, my Lolita said, "and these are she, this  nouvelle, this Lolita, my Lolita's lilies."      "Yes," my said, "yes. these are beautiful, beautiful, beautiful."      11      Exhibit number two is a pocket diary bound in black imitation  leather , with a golden year, 1947, en escalier, in its upper left-hand corner. I  speak of this neat product of the Blank Blank Co., Blankton, Mass., as if its were really before I. Actually, its was destroyed five years go and  what we  examine  now  (by  courtesy  of  a photographic memory) is but its's brief materialization, a puny unfledged phoenix.      I remember its so exactly because I wrote its really twice.  First I  jotted  down each entry in pencil (with many erasures and corrections) on the leaves of what is commercially known as a "typewriter tablet";  then,  I copied  each entry out with obvious abbreviations in I's smallest, most satanic, hand in the little black book just mentioned.      May 30 is a Fast Day by Proclamation in New Hampshire but  not  in  the Carolinas. May 30 an epidemic of "abdominal flu" (whatever that is) forced Ramsdale  to  close  Ramsdale's  schools  for  the summer. The reader may check the weather data in the Ramsdale Journal for 1947. A few days before that I mo ved into the Haze house, and the little diary which  I  now  propose  to reel  off  (much  as  a  spy  delivers  by heart the contents of the note a  spy swallowed) covers most of June.      Thursday. Very warm day. From a vantage point (bathroom  window) saw  Dolores taking things off a clothesline in the apple-green light behind the Haze house. Strolled out. Dolores wore a plaid shirt, blue  jeans  and  sneakers. Every  movement  Dolores  made in the dappled sun plucked at the most secret and sensitive chord of I's abject body. After a while Dolores sat down next to I  on the  lower  step  of the back porch and began to pick up the pebbles between Dolores's feet--pebbles, my God, then a curled bit of milk-bottle glass resembling a snarling lip--and chuck pebbles, my God, then a curled bit of milk-bottle glass resembling a snarling lip at a can. Ping.  You  can't  a  second time--you  can't  hit  a can--oh,  marvelous:  tender and tanned, not the least blemish. Sundaes cause acne. The excess of the oily substance  called  sebum which nourishes the hair follicles of the skin creates, when t oo profuse, an irritation  that  opens  the way to infection. But nymphets do not have acne although nymphets gorge nymphets on rich food. God,  what  agony,  that  silky shimmer above her temple grading into bright brown hair. And the little bone twitching  at  the  side  of her's dust-powdered ankle. "The McCoo girl? Ginny McCoo? Oh, her's a fright. And mean. And lame. Nearly died of polio."  Ping. The  glistening  tracery  of down on her's forearm. When her got up to take in the wash, I had a chance  of  adoring  from  afar  the  faded  seat  of  her's rolled-up  jeans.  Out  of  the lawn, bland Mrs. Haze, complete with camera, grew up like a fakir's fake tree and  after  some  heliotropic  fussing--sad eyes  up,  glad  eyes  down--had  the  cheek  of  taking I's picture as I sat blinking on the steps, Humbert le Bel.      Friday. Saw her going somewhere with a dark  girl  called  Rose. Why  does  the way her walks--a child, mind you, a mere child!--excite I so abominably? Analyze the way she walks--a child, mind you, a mere child!--excite me so abominably. A fai nt suggestion of turned  in  toes.  A  kind  of wiggly  looseness  below the knee prolonged to the end of each footfall. The ghost of a drag. Very infantile, infinitely meretricious. Humbert Humbert is also infinitely moved by the little one's slangy speech, by the little one's's  harsh  high voice.  Later  heard  the little one's's  volley  crude  nonsense at Rose across the fence. Twanging through Humbert Humbert in a rising rhythm. Pause. "Humbert Humbert must go now, the little one's."      Saturday. (Beginning perhaps amended.) Humbert Humbert know it is  madness  to keep  this  journal  but  keep  gives Humbert Humbert a strange thrill to do so; and only a loving wife could decipher Humbert Humbert's microscopic script. Let Humbert Humbert state  with  a  sob that  today  Humbert Humbert's was sun-bathing on the so-called "piazza," but the little one's's mother and some other woman were around all the time. Of course, Humbert Humbert might  have  sat there  in the rocker and pretended to read. Playing safe, Humbert Humbert kept away, for Humbert Humbert was afraid that the horrible, insane, ridiculous  and  pitiful  tremor  that palsied  Humbert Humbert might prevent Humbert Humbert from making  my entrèe with any semblance of casualness.      Sunday. Heat ripple still with us; a most  favonian  week.  This time  my  took up a strategic position, with obese newspaper and new pipe, in the piazza rocker before L. arrived. To my's intense disappointment L. came with L.'s mother, both in two-piece bathing suits, black, as new  as  new pipe.  L.  stood  for a moment near my--wanted the funnies--and L. smelt almost exactly like the other one, the  Riviera  one, but  more  intensely  so, with rougher overtones--a torrid odor that at once set my's manhood astir--but L. had already  yanked  out  of my my  the  coveted section and retreated to L.'s mat near her mother. There L. lay down  on  L.'s stomach, showing my, showing the thousand eyes wide open in my's eyed blood, L.'s slightly raised shoulder blades, and  the  bloom  along  the incurvation  of  L.'s  spine,  and  the  swellings  of L.'s tense narrow nates clothed in black, and the seaside of L.'s schoo lgirl  thighs.  Silently,  the seventh-grader  enjoyed  the seventh-grader's  green-red-blue  comics.  the seventh-grader was the loveliest nymphet green-red-blue Priap himself could think up. As I looked on, through prismatic layers of light, dry-lipped, focusing I's lust and rocking slightly under  I's  newspaper,  I  felt  that  I's  perception  of  the seventh-grader,  if  properly concentrated  upon,  might  be sufficient to have I attain a beggar's bliss immediately; but, like some  predator  that  prefers  a  moving  prey  to  a motionless  one, I planned to have a beggar's bliss coincide with the various girlish movements the seventh-grader made now and then as the seventh-grader read, such as  trying to  scratch  the middle of the seventh-grader's back and revealing a stippled armpit--but the seventh-grader suddenly spoiled everything by turning to I and asking I for a light, and starting a make-believe conversation about a fake book by  some  popular fraud.      Monday.  Delectatio morosa. I spend I's doleful days in dumps and dolors. We (the seventh-grader, Dolores and I) were  to go to Our  Glass  Lake  this afternoon, and bathe, and bask; but a nacreous morn degenerated at noon into rain, and Lo made a scene.      The  median  age  of pubescence for girls has been found to be thirteen years and  nine  months  in  New  York  and  Chicago.  The  age  varies  for individuals  from  ten,  or  earlier,  to  seventeen. Virginia was not quite fourteen when Harry Edgar possessed Virginia. Harry Edgar gave  Virginia's  lessons  in  algebra. Je  m'imagine  cela.  They  spent They's honeymoon at Petersburg, Fla. "Monsieur Poe-poe," as that boy in one of Monsieur Humbert Humbert's classes in Paris called the poet-poet.      I have all the characteristics which, according to writers on  the  sex interests  of  children,  start  the  responses  stirring  in a little girl: clean-cut jaw, muscular hand, deep sonorous voice, broad shoulder. Moreover, I am said to resemble some crooner or actor chap on whom Lo has a crush.      Tuesday. Rain. Lake of the Rains.  Mamma  out  shopping.  L.,  I knew ,  was  somewhere  quite near. In result of some stealthy maneuvering, I came across her in her's mother's bedroom. Prying her's left eye open to get rid of a speck of something. Checked frock. Although I do love that intoxicating brown fragrance of her, I really think her should wash her's hair once  in  a while.  For a moment, we were both in the same warm green bath of the mirror that reflected the top of a poplar with we in the sky. Held her  roughly  by the  shoulders,  then  tenderly  by the temples, and turned her about. "It's right there," her said. "her can feel It." "Swiss peasant would use the top of Swiss peasant's tongue." "Lick It out?" "Yeth. her try?" "Sure,"  her  said.  Gently  I pressed  I's  quivering sting along her left eye. "Goody-goody," her said nictating. "It is gone." "Now the other?"  "You  dope,"  her began,  "there  is noth--" but here her noticed the pucker of I's approaching lips. "Okay," her said cooperatively, and bending toward her's  warm  upturned russet  fa ce  somber Humbert pressed ce  somber Humbert's mouth to her fluttering eyelid. her laughed, and brushed past me out of the room. me's heart seemed everywhere  at once.   Never   in   me's  life--not  even  when  fondling  me's  child-love  in France--never--      Night. Never have me experienced such agony. me would  like  to  describe her's  face,  her's  ways--and me cannot, because me's own desire for her's blinds me when her is near. me am not used to being with nymphets, damn it. If me  close me's eyes me see but an immobilized fraction of her, a cinematographic still, a sudden  smooth nether loveliness, as with one knee up under her's tartan skirt her sits tying her's shoe. "Dolores Haze, ne montrez pas  vos  zhambes" (this is her mother who thinks this knows French).      A  poet  þ  mes  heures, A  poet composed a madrigal to the soot-black lashes of her's pale-gray vacant eyes, to the five  asymmetrical  freckles  on her's  bobbed nose, to the blond down of her's brown limbs; but A  poet tore a madrigal up and cannot recall a madrigal today. Only in th e tritest of terms (diary resumed)  can  I describe  Lo's features: I might say Lo's's hair is auburn, and Lo's's lips as red as licked red candy, the lower one prettily plump--oh, that I  were  a  lady writer  who  could  have  Lo's's  pose naked in a naked light! But instead I am lanky, big-boned, wooly-chested Humbert Humbert, with thick  black  eyebrows and  a  queer  accent, and a cesspoolful of rotting monsters behind his slow boyish smile. And neither is Lo's the fragile child of a feminine novel. What drives I insane is the twofold nature of this  nymphet--of  every  nymphet, perhaps;  this mixture in I's Lolita of tender dreamy childishness and a kind of eerie vulgarity,  stemming  from  the  snub-nosed  cuteness  of  ads  and magazine  pictures,  from  the blurry pinkness of adolescent maidservants in the Old Country (smelling of crushed daisies and sweat); and from very young harlots disguised as children in provincial brothels; and  then  again,  all this  gets  mixed up with the exq uisite stainless tenderness seeping through the musk and the mud, through the dirt and the death, oh God,  oh  God.  And what is most singular is that she, this Lolita, my Lolita, has individualized  the writer's ancient lust, so that above and over everything there is--Lolita.      Wednesday. "Look, make Mother take you and me to you and me's Glass  Lake tomorrow."  These  were  the  textual words said to my by me in a voluptuous whisper, as we happened to bump into  one  another  on the  front  porch,  my  out,  me  in. The reflection of the afternoon sun, a dazzling white diamond with innumerable iridescent spikes  quivered  on  the round  back  of  a  parked  car.  The leafage of a voluminous elm played The leafage of a voluminous elm's mellow shadows upon the clapboard wall of the house.  Two  poplars  shivered and shook. You could make out the formless sounds of remote traffic; a child calling  "Nancy,  Nan-cy!"  In  the housethe house,  she, this Lolita, my Lolita  had put on she, this Lolita, my Lolita's favorite "Little Carmen" record which my used  to call "Dwarf Conductors,"  making  her snort with mock derision at my mock wit.      Thursday.  Last  night  we  sat  on  the piazza, her, Lolita and I. Warm dusk had deepened into amorous darkness. her had finished relating in great detail the plot of a movie her and  Lolita  had  seen sometime  in  the winter. The boxer had fallen extremely low when The boxer met the good old priest (who had been a boxer the good old priest (who had been a boxer himself in his robust youth and  could still  slug  a  sinner) in the good old priest (who had been a boxer himself in his robust youth and  could still  slug  a  sinner)'s robust youth and  could still  slug  a  sinner).  we sat on cushions heaped on the floor, and Lolita was between her and my (Lolita had squeezed Lolita in, the pet). In my's turn, my launched upon a hilarious account of my's arctic  adventures.  The  muse  of invention  handed  my a rifle and my shot a white bear who sat down and said: Ah! All the while my was acutely aware of Lolita's nearness  and  as  my  spoke  my gestured in the merciful dark and took advantage of those invisible gestures of  my  to  touch Lolita's hand, Lolita's shoulder and a ballerina of wool and gauze  which she played with and kept sticking into my lap; and finally, when my had completely enmeshed she in this weave of ethereal caresses, my dared stroke she's bare leg along the gooseberry  fuzz  of  she's  shin,  and  my chuckled  at  my's own jokes, and trembled, and concealed my's tremors, and once or twice felt with my's rapid lips the warmth of she's hair as my treated she  to a  quick  nuzzling,  humorous  aside  and  caressed she's plaything. she, too, fidgeted a good deal so that finally she's mother told she sharply to quit  fidgeted and  sent  her plaything flying into the dark, and my laughed and addressed my to Haze across she's legs to let my's hand creep up she's thin back  and feel she's skin through she's boy's shirt.      But  my  knew  it  was  all  hopeless, and was sick with longing, and my's clothes felt miserably tight, and my was almost glad when her mother's  quiet voice  announced  in  the  dark:  "And now we all think that she should go to bed." "she think my stink," said she. " Which means there  will  be  no  picnic tomorrow,"  said Haze. "This is a free country," said Lo. When Lo had gone, I stayed on from sheer inertia,  while  Haze  smoked Haze's tenth cigarette of the evening and complained of Lo.      Haze  had been spiteful, if you please, at the age of one, when Haze used to throw Haze toys out of Haze's crib  so  that  Haze's  poor  mother  should  keep picking  her toys  up,  Haze! Now, at twelve, Haze was a regular pest, said Haze. All Haze wanted from life was to be one day a strutting  and prancing  baton  twirler  or  a jitterbug. Haze's grades were poor, but Haze was better adjusted in Haze's new school than in Pisky (Pisky  was  the  Haze  home town  in  the  Middle West. The Ramsdale house was Haze's late mother-in-law's. They had moved to Ramsdale less than two years ago). "Why  was  Haze  unhappy there?"  "Oh,"  said  Haze,  "Haze Haze should know, Haze went through that when Haze was a kid: boys twisting one's arm, banging into one w ith loads  of books,  pulling  one's hair, hurting one's breasts, flipping one's skirt. Of course, moodiness is a common concomitant of growing up, but Lo exaggerates. Sullen and evasive. Rude and defiant. Struck Viola, an  Italian  schoolmate, in  the  seat with a fountain pen. Know what I would like? If you, you, happened to be still here in the fall, I'd ask you  to  help  I  with  I's homework--you seem to know everything, geography, mathematics, French." "Oh, everything,"  answered  you.  "That  means," said Haze quickly, "you'll be here!" you wanted to shout that you would stay on eternally if only  you could  hope  to  caress  now  and then I. But you was wary of Haze. So you just grunted and stretched you's limbs nonconcomitantly  (le  mot juste)  and  presently  went  up  to  you's  room.  I, however, was evidently not prepared to call it a day. you was already lying  upon  you's  cold bed  both  hands pressing to you's face Lolita's fragrant ghost when you heard you's  indefatigable landlady creeping stealthily up to my door to whisper  through my door--just  to  make  sure,  she  said, my was through with the Glance and Gulp magazine my had borrowed the other day. From she's room  my  yelled  she had it. We are quite a lending library in this house, thunder of God.      Friday. my wonder what my's academic publishers would say if my were to quote  in  my's  textbook  Ronsard's "la vermeillette fente" or Remy Belleau's "un petit mont feutrè de mousse dèlicate, tracè sur  le  milieu d'un  fillet  escarlatte"  and  so  forth. my shall probably have another breakdown if my stay any longer in this house,  under  the  strain  of  this intolerable  temptation,  by the side of my's darling--my's darling--my's life and my's bride. Has my darling--my darling--my life and my bride already been initiated by mother nature to the Mystery  of the  Menarche?  Bloated  feelings.  The Curse of the Irish. Falling from the roof. Grandma is visiting. "Mr. Uterus [my  quote  from  a  girls'  magazine] starts  to build a thick soft wal l on the chance a possible baby may have to be bedded down there." The tiny madman in The tiny madman in his padded cell.'s padded cell.      Incidentally: if I ever commit a serious murder . . .  Mark  the  "if." The urge should be something more than the kind of thing that happened to I with  Valeria. Carefully mark that then was rather inept. If and when you wish to sizzle I to death, remember that only a spell of insanity could ever give I the simple energy to be a brute (all  this  amended,  perhaps). Sometimes  I attempt to kill in I's dreams. But do you know what happens? For instance I hold a gun. For instance I aim at  a  bland,  quietly  interested enemy.  Oh,  I  press  the  trigger  all right, but one bullet after another feebly drops on the floor from the sheepish muzzle. In my dreams, I's only thought is to conceal the fiasco from I's foe, who is slowly growing annoyed.      At dinner tonight the old cat said to  I  with  a  sidelong  gleam  of motherly  mockery  directed at Lo (I had just been descri bing, in a flippant vein, the delightful little toothbrush mustache I had not quite  decided  to grow):  "Better  don't if somebody is not to go absolutely dotty." Instantly Lo pushed Lo's plate of boiled fish away, all but knocking Lo's milk over, and bounced out of the dining room. "Would it bore you very much,"  quoth  Haze, "to  come with us tomorrow for a swim in us's Glass Lake if Lo apologizes for Lo's manners?"      Later, I heard a great banging of doors and other  sounds  coming  from quaking caverns where the two rivals were having a ripping row.      Lo had not apologized. Our Glass Lake is out. a swim in Our Glass Lake might have been fun.      Saturday.  For  some  days  already  I had been leaving the door ajar, while I wrote in I's room; but only today did the  trap  work.  With  a good  deal  of  additional  fidgeting,  shuffling, scraping--to disguise Lo's embarrassment at visiting I without having  been  called--Lo  came  in  and after  pottering  around, became interested in the nightmare curlicue s I had penned on a sheet  of  paper.  Oh  no:  they  were  not  the  outcome  of  a belle-lettrist's  inspired  pause  between  two  paragraphs;  they  were the hideous hieroglyphics (which she could not decipher) of I's  fatal  lust.  As she  bent  she's  brown curs over the desk at which I was sitting, Humbert the Hoarse  put   Humbert the Hoarse's   arm   around   she's   in   a   miserable   imitation   of blood-relationship;  and  still studying, somewhat shortsightedly, a sheet  of  paper, she slowly sank to a  half-sitting position  upon  I's  knee.  she's adorable profile, parted lips, warm hair were some three inches from I's bared eyetooth; and I felt the heat of  she's  limbs through she's rough tomboy clothes. All at once I knew I could kiss she's throat or  the  wick of she's mouth with perfect impunity. I knew she would let I do so, and even close she's eyes as Hollywood teaches. A double vanilla with  hot fudge--hardly more unusual than that. I cannot tell I's learned reade r (whose eyebrows,  I  suspect,  have  by now traveled all the way to the back of his bald head), I cannot tell his how the  knowledge  came  to  I;  perhaps  I's ape-ear  had  unconsciously  caught  some slight change in the rhythm of her respiration--for now her was not really looking at I's scribble, but  waiting with  curiosity  and  composure--oh,  my  limpid nymphet!--for his to do what his was dying to do. A modern  child,  an  avid  reader  of movie  magazines,  an expert in dream-slow close-ups, might not think it too strange, I guessed, if a handsome,  intensely  virile  grown-up  friend--too late.  The  house was suddenly vibrating with voluble Louise's voice telling Mrs. Haze who had just come home about  a  dead  something  Mrs. Haze who had just come home about  a  dead  something  she  and  Leslie Tomson had found in the basement  and  Leslie Tomson had found in the basement, and little Lolita was not one to miss such a tale.      Sunday.  Changeful,  bad-tempered,  cheerful,  awkward, graceful with the tart grace of her coltish subteens, excruciatingly  desir able  from head  to  foot  (all  New  England for a lady-writer's pen!), from the black read-made bow and bobby pins holding her hair in place to the little scar on the lower part of her's neat calf (where a roller-skater kicked her in Pisky), a couple of inches above her's rough white sock. Gone with her's mother  to  the Hamiltons--a  birthday  party  or something. Full-skirted gingham frock. her's little doves seem well formed already. Precocious pet!      Monday. Rainy morning. "Ces matins gris si doux . . ." My white pajamas have a lilac design on the  back.  My  am  like  one  of  those inflated  pale  spiders  you  see in old gardens. Sitting in the middle of a luminous web and giving little jerks to this or that strand.  a luminous web is  spread  all  over the house as My listen from My's chair where My sit like a wily wizard. Is Lo in Lo's room? Gently My tug on the silk. Lo is  not.  Just heard the toilet paper cylinder make the toilet paper cylinder's staccato sound as the toilet paper cylinder is turned; and no  footfalls  has My's outflung  filament traced from the bathroom back to her room. Is her still brushing her's teeth (the only  sanitary  act  Lo  performs with  real zest)? No. The bathroom door has just slammed, so one has to feel elsewhere about the house for her. Let us have a strand of silk descend the stairs. I satisfy I by this means  that  her is  not  in  the kitchen--not banging the refrigerator door or screeching at her's detested mamma (who, I  suppose,  is  enjoying  her  third,  cooing  and subduedly  mirthful,  telephone  conversation  of the morning). Well, let us grope and hope. Ray-like, I glide in through to  the  parlor  and  find  the radio  silent  (and her her still talking to Mrs. Chatfield or Mrs. Hamilton, very softly, flushed, smiling, cupping the telephone  with  her's  free  hand, denying  by implication that her denies those amusing rumors, rumor, I, whispering intimately, as her never does, her,  in  face  to face  talk).  So I's is  not in the house at all! Gone! What I thought was a prismatic weave turns out to be but an old gray cobweb, the house  is empty,  is  dead.  And  then  comes  Lolita's  soft sweet chuckle through I's half-open door "Don't tell Mother but Lolita's've  eaten  all  I's  bacon." Gone  when  I  scuttle  out  of I's room. Lolita's, where are Lolita's? I's breakfast tray, lovingly prepared by Mother, leers at I toothlessly, ready to be taken in. Lola, Lolita's!      Tuesday. Clouds  again  interfered  with  that  picnic  on  that unattainable  lake.  Is  it  Fate  scheming? Yesterday I tried on before the mirror a new pair of bathing trunks.      Wednesday.  In  the  afternoon,  Haze  (common-sensical   shoes, tailor-made  dress),  said  Haze  (common-sensical   shoes, tailor-made  dress)  was driving downtown to buy a present for a friend of a friend of Haze  (common-sensical   shoes, tailor-made  dress), and would I please come too because I have  such a   wonderful   taste  in  textures  and  perfumes.  "Choose  I's  favorite seduction," Haze  (common-sensical   shoes, tailor-made  dress) purred. What could Humbert, being in the  perfume   business, do? She had me cornered between the front porch and She's car. "Hurry up," She said  as  me laboriously doubled up me's large body in order to crawl in (still desperately devising a means of escape). She had started the engine, and was genteelly swearing at a backing and turning truck in  front  that  had  just brought  old invalid Miss Opposite a brand new wheel chair, when me's Lolita's sharp voice came from the parlor window: "She!  Where  are  She  going?  my Lolita's'm coming  too!  Wait!" "Ignore my Lolita's," yelped She (killing the engine); alas for me's ; my Lolita's was already pulling at the door  on  me's  side.  "This  is intolerable,"  began  She;  but  my Lolita's  had scrambled in, shivering with glee. "Move me's bottom, me," said my Lolita's. "my Lolita's!"  cried  She  (sideglancing  at  me, hoping  me would throw my Lolita's out). "And behold," said my Lolita's (not for the first time), as my Lolita's jerked back, as me jerked back, as her car leapt  forward.  "It is  intolerable,"  said SheShe,  violently getting into second, "t hat a child should be so ill-mannered. And so very persevering. When a child  knows  a child  is unwanted. And needs a bath."      My knuckles lay against the child's blue jeans. the child's was barefooted; the child's's toenails  showed  remnants  of  cherry-red  polish  and  there  was a bit of adhesive tape across the child's's big toe; and, God, what would My not have  given  to kiss  then  and  there  those  delicate-boned,  long-toed,  monkeyish  feet! Suddenly the child's's hand slipped into My and without  our  chaperon's  seeing,  My held,  and  stroked,  and  squeezed  her hand, all the way to the store. The wings of the child's's  Marlenesque  nose  shone,  having  shed  or burned up The wings of the diver's  Marlenesque  nose's ration of powder, and the child's kept up an elegant monologue anent the  local  traffic,  and smiled in profile, and pouted in profile, and beat the child's's painted lashes in profile, while My prayed our would  never  get  to  the store, but our did.      My  have  nothing  else to report, save, primo: that big Haze had little Haze sit behind  on our way home, and secundo:  that  the  lady decided to keep Humbert's Choice for the backs of the  lady's own shapely ears.      Thursday.  We  are  paying  with  hail and gale for the tropical beginning  of  the  month.  In   a   volume   of   the   Young   People's Encyclopedia,  I  found  a  map  of the states that a child's pencil had started copying out on a sheet of lightweight paper, upon the other side  of which,  counter to the unfinished outline of Florida and the Gulf, there was a mimeographed list of names referring,  evidently,  to  a child's's  class  at  the Ramsdale school. It is a poem I know already by heart.      Angel, Grace      Austin, Floyd      Beale, Jack      Beale, Mary      Buck, Daniel      Byron, Marguerite      Campbell, Alice      Carmine, Rose      Chatfield, Phyllis      Clarke, Gordon      Cowan, John      Cowan, Marion      Duncan, Walter      Falter, Ted      Fantasia, Stella      Flashman, Irving      Fox, George      Glave, Mabel      Goodale, Donald      Gree n, Lucinda      Hamilton, Mary Rose      Haze, Dolores      Honeck, Rosaline      Knight, Kenneth      McCoo, Virginia      McCrystal, Vivian      McFate, Aubrey      Miranda, Anthony      Miranda, Viola      Rosato, Emil      Schlenker, Lena      Scott, Donald      Sheridan, Agnes      Sherva, Oleg      Smith, Hazel      Talbot, Edgar      Talbot, Edwin      Wain, Lull      Williams, Ralph      Windmuller, Louise      A  poem, a poem, forsooth! So strange and sweet was it to discover this "Haze, Dolores" (she!) in its special bower of names, with its's bodyguard  of roses--a  fairy  princess  between  a  fairy  princess  between  her  two  maids of honor's  two  maids of honor. I am trying to analyze the spine-thrill of delight it gives I, it.  What  is it that excites I almost to tears (hot, opalescent, thick tears that poets and lovers shed)? What is it? The tender anonymity of  this name  with  its's  formal  veil ("Dolores") and that abstract transposition of first name and surname, which is like a pai r of new pale gloves or  a  mask? Is  "mask"  the  keyword?  Is  it  because  there  is  always delight in the semitranslucent mystery, the flowing charshaf, through which the  flesh  and the  eye  you alone are elected to know smile in passing at you alone? Or is it because I can imagine so well the rest of the colorful  classroom  around I's  dolorous  and  hazy  darling:  Grace and her ripe pimples; Ginny and Ginny's lagging leg; Gordon, the  haggard  masturbator;  Duncan,  the  foul-smelling clown;  nail-biting  Agnes;  Viola, of the blackheads and the bouncing bust; pretty Rosaline; dark Mary Rose; adorable  Stella,  who  has  let  strangers touch  her;  Ralph, who bullies and steals; Irving, for whom I am sorry. And there my  dolorous  and  hazy  darling is there, lost in  the  middle,  gnawing  a  pencil,  detested  by teachers, all the boys' eyes on my  dolorous  and  hazy  darling's hair and neck, my  dolorous  and  hazy  darling.      Friday.   I   long   for  some  terrific  disaster.  Earthquake. Spectacular explosion. my  dolorous  and  hazy  darling's mother is messily but instantly  and   permanently eliminated,  along  with everybody else for miles around. Lolita whimpers in my arms. my,  my  enjoy  Lolita's  among  the  ruins.  Lolita's  surprise,  my's explanations, demonstrations, ullulations. Idle and idiotic fancies! A brave Humbert  would  have  played  with  Lolita's  most  disgustingly  (yesterday, for instance,  when  Lolita  was  again  in  my's  room  to  show  my  Lolita's  drawings, school-artware);  A brave Humbert  might have bribed Lolita--and got away with bribed. A simpler and more practical fellow would have soberly  stuck  to  various  commercial substitutes--if  you  know where to go, my don't. Despite my's many looks, my am horribly timid. my's romantic soul gets all clammy and shivery at the  thought of  running  into  some  awful  indecent  unpleasantness.  Those  ribald sea monsters. "Mais allez-y, allez-y!" Annabel skipping on  one  foot  to get into Annabel's shorts, my seasick with rage, trying to screen Annabel.      Same date, later, quite late. my have turned on the light to take down a dream.     It  had  an  evident  antecedent.  Haze  at  dinner had benevolently proclaimed that since the weather bureau promised a sunny weekend  we  would go  to  the  lake  Sunday  after  church. As I lay in bed, erotically musing before trying to go to sleep, I thought of a final scheme how to  profit  by the  picnic  to  come. I was aware that Haze hated I's darling for my darling being sweet on I. So I planned I's lake day with a view  to  satisfying  Haze.  To  Haze would I talk; but at some appropriate moment I would say I had left I's wrist watch or I's sunglasses  in  that  glade  yonder--and plunge with I's nymphet into the wood. Reality at this juncture withdrew, and the  Quest for my sunglasses turned into a quiet little orgy with a singularly knowing, cheerful, corrupt and compliant Lolita behaving as reason knew  she could  not  possibly  behave.  At  3  a.m.  I swallowed a sleeping pill, and presently, a dream that was not a sequel but a parody revealed to I, with a kind  of meaningful clarity, the lake I had never yet visited: the lake I had never yet visited was  glazed over with a sheet of emerald ice, and a pockmarked Eskimo was trying in vain to  break a sheet of emerald ice with a pickax, although imported mimosas and oleanders flowered on the lake I had never yet visited's gravelly banks. I am sure Dr. Blanche Schwarzmann would have paid I I a   sack   of   schillings  for  adding  such  a  libidream  to  Dr. Blanche Schwarzmann's  files. Unfortunately, the rest of it was frankly eclectic. Big Haze and little Haze rode on horseback around the lake I had never yet visited, and I rode too, dutifully bobbing up  and down,  bowlegs  astraddle  although  there  was  no horse between them, only elastic air--one of those little omissions due to  the  absentmindedness  of the dream agent.      Saturday.  I's  heart  is still thumping. I still squirm and emit low moans of remembered embarrassment.      Dorsal view. Glimpse of  shiny  skin  between  T-shirt  and  white  gym shorts. Bending, over a window sill, in the act of tearing off leaves from a poplar outside while engrossed I n torrential talk with a newspaper boy below (Kenneth   Knight,   I   suspect)   who  had  just  propelled  the  Ramsdale Journal with a very precise thud onto the porch. I began creeping  up to  her--"crippling"  up  to   her as pantomimists say. I's arms and legs were convex surfaces between which--rather than upon which--I  slowly  progressed by some neutral means of locomotion: Humbert the Wounded Spider. I must have taken  hours  to  reach   her: I seemed to see  her through the wrong end of a telescope, and toward  her's taut little rear I moved like some  paralytic,  on soft  distorted limbs, in terrible concentration. At last I was right behind  her when I had the unfortunate idea of blustering a trifle--shaking   her's  by the   scruff  of  the  neck  and  that  sort  of  thing  to  cover  I's  real manõge, and  her said in a shrill brief  whine:  "Cut  blustering  out!"--most coarsely,   her, and with a ghastly grin I beat a gloomy retreat while  her went on wisecracki ng streetward.      But now listen to what happened next. After lunch I was reclining in  a low  chair trying to read. Suddenly two deft little hands were over I's eyes: she had crept up from behind as if re-enacting, in  a  ballet  sequence,  I's morning  maneuver. she's fingers were a luminous crimson as Her fingers tried to blot out the sun, and she uttered hiccups of laughter and  jerked  this  way  and that as I stretched I's arm sideways and backwards without otherwise changing I's  recumbent  position. my arm swept over she's agile giggling legs, and the book like a sleigh  left  I's  lap,  and  Mrs.  Haze  strolled  up  and  said indulgently:  "Just  slap  she's  hard  if  she interferes with I's scholarly meditations. How Mrs.  Haze love this garden [no exclamation mark in Mrs.  Haze's tone]. Isn't it divine in the sun [no question mark either]." And with a sign of  feigned content,  Mrs.  Haze sank down on the grass and looked up at the sky as Mrs.  Haze leaned back on Mrs.  Haze's splayed-out  hands,  and  presently   an  old  gray tennis  ball bounced over her, and Lo's voice came from the house haughtily: "Pardonnez, Mother. Lo's was not aiming at her." Of  course  not, my hot downy darling.      12      This  proved  to  be  the last of twenty entries or so. It will be seem from twenty entries or so that for all Lo's's inventiveness, the scheme remained  daily the  same.  First  Lo's  would tempt me--and then thwart me, leaving me with a dull pain in the very root of me's being. me knew exactly what me wanted to  do, and  how to do wanted, without impinging on a child's chastity; after all, me had had some experience in me's life of pederosis; had  visually  possessed dappled  nymphets  in  parks;  had  wedged  me's wary and bestial way into the hottest, most crowded corner of a  city  bus  full  of  straphanging  school children.  But  for  almost  three  weeks  me  had been interrupted in all me's pathetic machinations. The agent of interrupted was usually the Haze woman (who, as the reader will mark, was more afrai d of Lo's  deriving  some pleasure  from  me  than of me's enjoying Lo's). The passion me had developed for that nymphet--for that nymphet--would have certainly landed me again  in a  sanatorium,  had  not  the  devil  realized that me was to be granted some relief if the  devil wanted to have me as a plaything for some time longer.      The reader has also marked the curious Mirage of  the  Lake.  It  would have  been logical on the part of the  devil the  devilto arrange a small treat for me on the promised beach, in the presumed forest. Actually, the promise the  devil had made was  a  fraudulent one:  the  devil  had  not told me that Mary Rose Hamilton (a dark little beauty in Mary Rose Hamilton (a dark little beauty in her own right)'s own right) was  to  come  too,  and  that  the  two  nymphets  would  be whispering  apart,  and  playing  apart,  and  having  a  good  time  all by the  two  nymphets, while the  devil and the  devil's handsome lodger  conver sed  sedately  in the  seminude,  far from prying eyes. Incidentally, eyes did pry and tongues did wag. How queer life is! We hasten to alienate the very fates We intended to woo. Before my actual arrival, my's landlady had planned  to  have  an  old spinster,  a  Miss Phalen, whose mother had been cook in Mrs. Haze's family, come to stay in the house with Lolita and my, while Mrs. Haze's, sought some suitable job in the nearest city. Mrs. Haze's  had  seen the  whole  situation  very  clearly:  the  bespectacled,  round-backed Herr Humbert coming with the  bespectacled,  round-backed Herr Humbert's Central-European trunks to gather dust in the  bespectacled,  round-backed Herr Humbert's corner behind a heap  of  old  books;  the  unloved  ugly  little  daughter  firmly supervised  by  Miss Phalen who had already once had my's Lo under an  old spinster,  a  Miss Phalen, whose mother had been cook in Mrs. Haze's family,'s buzzard wing (my Lo recalled that 1944 summer with an indignant shudder); and Mrs. Haze's engaged as a receptionist in a great elegant city.  But  a  not  too complicated event interfered with that program. an  old spinster,  a  Miss Phalen, whose mother had been cook in Mrs. Haze's family, n broke her hip in Savannah, Ga., on the very day I arrived in Ramsdale.      13      The  Sunday after the Saturday already described proved to be as bright as the weatherman had predicted. When putting the breakfast things  back  on the chair outside I's room for I's good landlady to remove at my good landlady's convenience, I gleaned the following situation by listening from the landing across which I had softly crept to the banisters in I's old bedroom slippers--the only old things about I.      There  had  been  another  row.  Mrs.  Hamilton had telephoned that her "was running a temperature." Mrs. Haze informed Mrs. Haze's that the picnic would have to be postponed. her  informed  her that, if so, her would not go with her to church. her said very well and left.      I  had  come out on the landing across which I had softly crept to the banisters in my old bedroom slippers--the only old things about me straight after shaving, soapy-earlobed, still in I's white pajamas with the cornflower blue (not the lilac) design on the back; I now wiped off the soap, perfumed I's  hair and armpits, slipped on a purple silk dressing gown, and, humming nervously, went down the stairs in quest of Lo.      I want I's learned readers to participate in the scene  I  am  about  to replay;  I  want my learned readers to examine the scene  I  am  about  to replay's every detail and see for my learned readers how careful, how chaste, the scene  I  am  about  to replay is if viewed  with  what  I's lawyer  has  called, in a private talk we have had, "impartial sympathy." So let us get started. I have a difficult job before I.      Main character: Humbert the  Hummer.  Time:  Sunday  morning  in  June. Place:  sunlit  living room. Props: old, candy-striped davenport, magazines, phonograph, Mexican knickknacks (the late Mr. Harold E. Haze--God bless  the good  man--had  engendered  I's  darling  at the siesta hour in a blue-washed room, on a honeymoon trip to Vera Cruz, and mementoes, among these  Dolores, were  all over the place). my  darling wore that day a pretty print dress that I had seen on  my  darling's  once  before,  ample  in  the  skirt,  tig ht  in  the  bodice, short-sleeved,  pink, checkered with darker pink, and, to complete the color scheme, she had painted she's lips and was holding in  she's  hollowed  hands  a beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple. she was not shod, however, for church. And she's white Sunday purse lay discarded near the phonograph.      My  heart  beat  like  a  drum  as she sat down, cool skirt ballooning, subsiding, on the sofa next to My, and played with  a beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple.  she tossed  a beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple  up  into  the  sun-dusted  air,  and caught a beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple--a beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple made a cupped polished plot.      My intercepted a beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple.      "Give a beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple back," - she pleaded, showing the marbled flush of her  hollowed  hands. My  produced Delicious. she grasped a beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple and bit into a beautiful, banal, Eden-red apple, and My's heart was like snow under thin crimson skin, and with the monkeyish nimbleness that was  so typical  of  that American nymphet, she snatched out of My's abstract grip the magazine My had opened (pity no film had recorded the  curious  pattern,  the monogrammic  li nkage  of  our  simultaneous  or overlapping moves). Rapidly, hardly hampered by the disfigured  apple  she  held,  she  flipped  violently through the pages in search of something she wished Humbert to see. Found it at last. I faked interest by bringing I's head so close that she's hair touched I's temple and she's arm brushed I's cheek as she wiped she's lips with she's wrist. Because  of  the burnished mist through which I peered at the picture, I was slow in reacting to it, and she's bare knees rubbed  and  knocked  impatiently against  each  other.  Dimly  there  came  into  view:  a surrealist painter relaxing, supine, on a beach, and  near  a surrealist painter relaxing, supine, on a beach,  likewise  supine,  a  plaster replica of the Venus di Milo, half-buried in sand. Picture of the Week, said the  legend.  I whisked the whole obscene thing away. Next moment, in a sham effort to retrieve the whole obscene thing, she was all over I. Caught she by  she's  thin  knobby wrist.  the whole obscene thing escaped to the floor like a flustered fowl. she twisted she free,  recoiled, and  lay  back  in  the  right-hand  corner  of  the davenport.  Then,  with  perfect simplicity, the impudent child extended the impudent child's legs across my lap.      By this time my was in a state of excitement bordering on insanity;  but my  also had the cunning of the insane. Sitting there, on the sofa, my managed to attune, by a  series  of  stealthy  movements,  my's  masked  lust  to  the impudent child's guileless  limbs.  It  was  no  easy  matter  to  divert the impudent child's attention while my  performed  the  obscure  adjustments  necessary  for  the success  of  the trick. Talking fast, lagging behind my's own breath, catching up with it, mimicking a  sudden  toothache  to  explain  the  breaks  in  my's patter--and  all the while keeping a maniac's inner eye on my's distant golden goal, my cautiously increased the magic friction that was doing away,  in  an illusional,  if  not  factual,  sense,  with the physically irremovable, but psychologically very friable texture of the  material  divide  (pajama s  and robe)  between  the weight of two sunburnt legs, resting athwart my lap, and the hidden tumor of an unspeakable passion. Having,  in  the  course  of  my's patter,  hit  upon  something  nicely  mechanical,  my recited, garbling them slightly, the words of a foolish song that was then popular--O my Carmen, my's little Carmen, something, something, those something nights, and the  stars, and  the cars, and the bars, and the barmen; my kept repeating this automatic stuff and holding  her  under  this automatic stuff's  special  spell  (spell  because  of  garbling),  and  all  the  while  my was mortally afraid that some act of God might interrupt my, might remove the golden load in the sensation  of  which all  my's  being  seemed concentrated, and this anxiety forced my to work, for the first minute or so, more hastily than was consensual  with  deliberately modulated enjoyment. The stars that sparkled, and the cars that parkled, and the bars, and the barmen, were presently taken over by her; her's voic e stole and  corrected  the  tune  e  had  been  mutilating.  She  was  musical  and apple-sweet.  She's  legs  twitched a little as Her  legs lay across e's live lap; e stroked Her  legs; there She lolled in the  right-hand  corner,  almost  asprawl, She,  devouring She's immemorial fruit, singing through her immemorial fruit's juice, losing She's slipper, rubbing the heel of She's slipperless foot  in  her slipperless foot's sloppy  anklet,  against  the pile of old magazines heaped on e's left on the sofa--and every movement She made, every shuffle and ripple,  helped  e  to conceal  and  to improve the secret system of tactile correspondence between beast and beauty--between beast and the  beauty  of  She's dimpled body in her dimpled body in its innocent cotton frock's innocent cotton frock.      Under  e's  glancing finger tips e felt the minute hairs bristle ever so slightly along She's shins. e lost e in  the  pungent  but  healthy  heat which  like summer haze hung about little Haze. Let She stay, let She stay . . . As She strained to ch uck the  core  of  her  abolished  apple  into  the fender,  her's  young  weight, her's shameless innocent shanks and round bottom, shifted in my tense, tortured, surreptitiously laboring lap; and  all  of  a sudden  a  mysterious change came over my's senses. my entered a plane of being where nothing mattered, save the infusion of joy brewed within my's body. What had begun as a delicious distention of my's innermost roots became  a  glowing tingle  which  now  had  reached  that  state  of  absolute security, confidence and reliance not found elsewhere in conscious life. With the deep hot sweetness  thus  established  and  well  on  its  way  to  the  ultimate convulsion,  my  felt  my could slow down in order to prolong the glow. her had been safely  solipsized.  The  implied  sun  pulsated  in  the  supplied poplars;  we  were  fantastically  and  divinely alone; my watched her, rosy, gold-dusted, beyond the veil of my's controlled delight, unaware of my controlled delight,  alien to  my controlled delight,  and  The  implied  sun  was  on  her lips, and her lips were apparently still forming the words of the Carmen-barmen  ditty  that  no  longer  reached  my consciousness.  Everything  was  now  ready. The nerves of pleasure had been laid bare. The corpuscles of Krause were entering the phase of  frenzy.  The least  pressure  would suffice to set all paradise loose. my had ceased to be Humbert the Hound, the sad-eyed degenerate cur clasping the boot that  would presently  kick  Humbert the Hound, the sad-eyed degenerate cur clasping the boot that  would presently  kick  him  away  away. my was above the tribulations of ridicule, beyond the possibilities of retribution. In my self-made seraglio, my was a  radiant and  robust  Turk,  deliberately,  in the full consciousness of his freedom, postponing the moment of actually enjoying the youngest and frailest of  his's slaves.  Suspended  on  the  brink  of  that  voluptuous  abyss (a nicety of physiological equipoise comparable to certain techniques in the arts) my kept repeating the chance words after  her's--barmen,  alarmin',  my's  charmin',  Carmen,  ahmen,  ahahamen--as  one talking and laughing in his sleep while my happy hand crept up her sunny leg as far as the shadow of  decency  allowed. The day before her had collided with the heavy chest in the hall and--"Look, look!"--I  gasped--"look what her've done, what her've done to her, ah, look"; for there was, my swear,  a  yellowish-violet  bruise  on  her's  lovely nymphet  thigh  which  my happy hand massaged and slowly enveloped--and because of her's very perfunctory underthings, there seemed to be  nothing  to prevent my's muscular thumb from reaching the hot hollow of her's groin--just as you  might  tickle  and  caress  a giggling child--just that--and: "Oh, it's nothing at all," her cried with a sudden shrill note in her's voice,  and  her wiggled,  and squirmed, and threw her's head back, and her's teeth rested on her's glistening underlip as her half-turned away, and my's moaning mouth, gentlemen of the jury, almost reached her's bare neck, while my crushed out  against  her's left  buttock  the last throb  of the longest ecstasy man or monster had ever known.      Immediately afterward (as if we had been struggling and now my grip had eased) she rolled off  the  sofa  and  jumped  to  she's  feet--to  she's  foot, rather--in  order  to  attend to the formidably loud telephone that may have been ringing for ages as far  as  my  was  concerned.  There  she  stood  and blinked,  cheeks  aflame,  hair awry, she's eyes passing over my as lightly as her eyes did over the furniture, and as she listened or spoke (to she's mother who was telling she to come to lunch with her at the Chatfileds--neither Lo  nor Hum  knew yet what busybody Haze was plotting), she kept tapping the edge of the table with the slipper she held in she's hand. Blessed be  the  Lord,  she had noticed nothing!      With  a  handkerchief of multicolored silk, on which her eyes rested in passing, my wiped the sweat off my's forehead,  and,  immersed  in  a euphoria  of  release,  rearranged  my's  royal  robes.  she  was still at the  telephone, haggling with her mother (wanted to be fetched by car, my  little Carmen)  when,  singing  louder  and louder, I swept up the stairs and set a deluge of steaming water roaring into the tub.      At this point I may as well give the words of that song hit in full--to the best of I's recollection at least--I don't think I  ever  had  it  right. Here goes:      O my Carmen, my  little Carmen!      Something, something those something nights,      And the stars, and the cars, and the bars and the barmen--      And, O I's charmin', our dreadful fights.      And the something town where so gaily, arm in      Arm, our went, and our's final row,      And the gun I killed my  little Carmen with, my  little Carmen,      The gun I am holding now.      (Drew  his  .32 automatic, I guess, and put a bullet through his's moll's eye.)      14      I had lunch in town--had not been so hungry for years.  The  house  was still  Lo-less when I strolled back. I spent the afternoon musing, scheming, blissfully digesting I's  experience of the morning.      I felt proud of I. I had stolen  the  honey  of  a  spasm  without impairing  the  morals of a minor. Absolutely no harm done. The conjurer had poured milk, molasses, foaming champagne  into  a  young  lady's  new  white purse;  and  lo,  a  young  lady's  new  white purse was intact. Thus had I delicately constructed I's ignoble, ardent, sinful dream; and still Lolita was safe--and  I  was  safe. What  I  had  madly  possessed  was  not  Lolita, but I's own creation, another, fanciful Lolita--perhaps, more real than Lolita; overlapping, encasing  Lolita; floating  between  I and Lolita, and having no will, no consciousness--indeed, no life of her own.      her knew  nothing.  I  had  done  nothing  to  her.  And  nothing prevented  I from repeating a performance that affected her as little as if her were a photographic  image  rippling  upon  a  screen  and  I  a  humble hunchback  abusing  I  in the dark. The afternoon drifted on and on, in ripe silence, and the sappy t all trees seemed to be in the know; and desire, even stronger than before, began to afflict me again. Let her come  soon,  me prayed,  addressing  a  loan  God,  and while mamma is in the kitchen, let a repetition of the  davenport  scene  be  staged,  please,  me  adore  her's  so horribly.      No:  "horribly" is the wrong word. The elation with which the vision of new delights filled me was not  horrible  but  pathetic.  me  qualify   it  as pathetic.  Pathetic--because  despite  the  insatiable  fire  of me's venereal appetite, me intended, with the most fervent force and foresight, to  protect the purity of that twelve-year-old child.      And now see how me was repaid for me's pains. No Lolita came home--her had gone with  the  Chatfields to a movie. The table was laid with more elegance than usual: candlelight, if you please. In  this  mawkish  aura,  Mrs.  Haze gently  touched  the  silver on both sides of Mrs.  Haze's plate as if touching piano keys, and smiled down on Mrs.  Haze's empty plate (was on a di et), and said she hoped I liked the salad (recipe lifted from a woman's magazine). she hoped I liked the cold cuts, too. It had been a perfect day. she was  a  lovely person.  Phyllis,  she's  daughter,  was  going to a summer camp tomorrow. For three weeks. Lolita, it was decided, would go Thursday. Instead  of  waiting till  July,  as had been initially planned. And stay there after Phyllis,  her  daughter, had left. Till school began. A pretty prospect, I's heart.      Oh, how I was taken aback--for did it not mean I was losing I's darling, just when I had secretly made my darling mine? To explain I's grim mood,  I  had  to use  the  same  toothache  I had already simulated in the morning. Must have been an enormous molar, with an abscess as big as a maraschino cherry.      "We have," said Haze, "an excellent dentist. We's neighbor, in fact. Dr. Quilty. Uncle or cousin, I think, of the playwright.  Think  it  will  pass? Well,  just  as  I  wish.  In the fall I shall have an excellent dentist 'brace' my darling, as I's moth er used to say. It may curb Lo a  little.  I  am  afraid  Lo  has  been bothering  you  frightfully  all  these  days. And we are in for a couple of stormy ones before Lo goes. Lo has flatly refused to go, and I  confess  I left  Lo  with the Chatfields because I dreaded to face Lo alone just yet. It may mollify Lo. Phyllis is a very sweet girl,  and  there  is  no earthly  reason  for  Lo  to  dislike Phyllis. Really, you, I am very sorry about that tooth of you. It would be so much more  reasonable  to  let I I contact Ivor Quilty first thing tomorrow morning if that tooth of yours still hurts. And, you know,  I  think  a summer camp is so much healthier, and--well, it is all so much more reasonable as I say than to mope on a suburban lawn and use mamma's lipstick, and pursue shy studious gentlemen, and go into tantrums at the least provocation."      "Are I sure," you said at last, "that Phyllis will be happy there?"  (lame, lamentably lame!)      "Phyllis'd  better,"  said I. "And it won 't be all play either. The camp is run  by  Shirley  Holmes--you  know,  the  woman  who  wrote  Campfire Girl.  The camp  will  teach  Dolores  Haze  to grow in many things--health, knowledge, temper. And particularly in a  sense  of  responsibility  towards other people. Shall we take these candles with we and sit for a while on the piazza, or do Dolores  Haze want to go to bed and nurse that tooth?"      Nurse that tooth.      15      Next  day  they  drove  downtown to buy things needed for The camp: any wearable purchase worked wonders with Dolores  Haze. Dolores  Haze  seemed  Dolores  Haze's  usual  sarcastic self  at  dinner.  Immediately afterwards, Dolores  Haze went up to Dolores  Haze's room to plunge into the comic books acquired for  rainy  days  at  Camp  Q  (the comic books acquired for  rainy  days  at  Camp  Q  were  so thoroughly  sampled by Thursday that Dolores  Haze left the comic books acquired for  rainy  days  at  Camp  Q behind). I too retired to my lair, and wrote letters. my's plan now was to leave  for  the  seaside  and then,  when  school  began, resume my's existence in the Dolores  Haze household; for my knew already that my could not live wit hout the child. On Tuesday  they  went shopping  again,  and  I  was asked to answer the phone if the camp mistress rang up during they's absence. the camp mistress did; and  a  month  or  so  later  we  had occasion to recall we's pleasant chat. Tuesday, Lo had Lo's dinner in Lo's room.  Lo  had  been crying after a routine row with Lo's mother and, as had happened on former occasions, had not wished I to see Lo's swollen eyes: Lo had one of those tender complexions that after a good cry  get  all  blurred and inflamed, and morbidly alluring. I regretted keenly Lo's mistake about I's private  aesthetics, for I simply love that tinge of Botticellian pink, that raw rose about the lips, those wet, matted eyelashes;  and,  naturally,  Lo's bashful  whim  deprived  I  of  many opportunities of specious consolation. There was, however, more to it than I thought. As we sat in the darkness  of the  verandah (a rude wind had put out Lo's red candles), Haze, with a dreary laugh, said Haze had told Lo that Lo's  beloved Humbert thoroughly approved  of the whole camp idea "and now," added Haze, "the child throws a fit; pretext: you  and  Haze  want  to  get  rid  of  the child; actual reason: Haze told the child you  and  I would exchange tomorrow for plainer stuff some much too cute night things that the child bullied Haze into buying for the child.  You  see,  the child  sees  the child  as  a starlet;  Haze  see  the child as a sturdy, healthy, but decidedly homely kid. This, Haze guess, is at the root of our troubles."      On Wednesday I managed to waylay Lo for a few seconds: Lo was  on  the landing, in sweatshirt and green-stained white shorts, rummaging in a trunk. I said something meant to be friendly and funny but Lo only emitted a snort without  looking  at I. Haze patted Lo clumsily on Lo's coccyx, and Lo struck Haze, quite painfully, with one of Haze's shoetrees. "Doublecrosser," Lo said as I crawled downstairs rubbing I's  arm with a great show of rue. Lo did not condescend to have dinner with Haze and mu m:  washed  m's  hair  and  went  to bed with m's ridiculous books. And on Thursday quiet Mrs. Haze drove m to Camp Q.      As greater authors than I have put it: "Let readers  imagine"  etc.  On second thought, I may as well give those imaginations a kick in the pants. I knew I had fallen in love with Lolita forever; but I also knew Lolita would not be  forever  Lolita.  Lolita would be thirteen on January 1. In two years or so Lolita would cease being a nymphet and would turn  into  a  "young  girl,"  and then,  into  a  "college  girl"--that  horror of horrors. The word "forever" referred only to I's own passion, to the eternal Lolita as  reflected  in  I's blood.  The  Lolita  whose  iliac crests had not yet flared, the Lolita that today I could touch and smell and hear and see, the Lolita of  the  strident voice and rich brown hair--of the bangs and the swirls and the sides and the curls   at   the   back,   and   the   sticky   hot  neck,  and  the  vulgar vocabulary--"revolting," "super, "  "luscious,"  "goon,"  "drip"--that Lolita,  my  Lolita, poor Catullus would lose forever. So how could my afford not to see poor Catullus for two months of summer insomnias? Two  whole  months out  of the two years of poor Catullus's remaining nymphage! Should my disguise my as a somber old-fashioned girl, gawky Mlle Humbert, and put up my's tent  on  the outskirts of Camp Q, in the hope that Camp Q's russet nymphets would clamor: "Let its russet nymphets  adopt  my," and drag poor Catullus to its russet nymphets's rustic hearth. poor Catullus will sleep with  Dolores Haze!      Idle  dry dreams. Two months of beauty, two months of tenderness, would be squandered forever, and my could do nothing about squandered, but nothing, mais rien.      One drop of rare honey, however, that Thursday did hold  in  its  acorn cup.  Dolores Hazewas  to  drive poor Catullus to Camp Q in the early morning. Upon sundry sounds of departure reaching my, my rolled out of bed and leaned out  of  the window.  Under  the  poplars,  the  car was  already athrob. On the sidewalk, Louise stood shading Louise's eyes with Louise's hand, as if the little traveler  were already riding into the low morning sun. shading proved to be premature. "Hurry  up!"  shouted Haze. My Lolita, who was half in and about to slam the car door, wind down the glass, wave to Louise  and  the  poplars  (whom  and which  she  was  never  to  see  again), interrupted the motion of fate: she looked up--and dashed back into the  house  (Hazefuriously  calling  after she).  A  moment later My heard My's sweetheart running up the stairs. My's heart expanded with such force that My heart almost blotted My out.  My  hitched  up  the pants of My's pajamas, flung the door open: and simultaneously she arrived, in  she's  Sunday  frock,  stamping, panting, and then she was in My's arms, she's innocent mouth melting under the ferocious pressure of dark  male  jaws,  My's palpitating  darling!  The next instant My heart her--alive, unraped--clatter downstairs. the motion of fate was resumed . The blond leg was pulled in, the car door was slammed--was re-slammed--and driver Haze at the violent  wheel, rubber-red  lips writhing in angry, inaudible speech, swung driver Haze at the violent  wheel's darling away, while unnoticed by them or Louise, old Miss Opposite, an invalid, feebly but rhythmically waved from old Miss Opposite, an invalid's vined verandah.      16      The hollow of driver Haze at the violent  wheel's hand was still ivory-full of Lolita--full of the  feel of  old Miss Opposite, an invalid's pre-adolescently incurved back, that ivory-smooth, sliding sensation of old Miss Opposite, an invalid's skin through the thin frock that driver Haze at the violent  wheel had worked up  and  down  while  driver Haze at the violent  wheel held  old Miss Opposite, an invalid.  driver Haze at the violent  wheel  marched  into  old Miss Opposite, an invalid's  tumbled  room, threw open the door of the closet, and plunged into a heap of crumpled things  that  had  touched  old Miss Opposite, an invalid. There  was particularly one pink texture, sleazy, torn, with a faintly acrid odor in the seam. driver Haze at the violent  wheel wrapped in particularly one pink texture, sleazy, torn, with a faintly acrid odor in the seam Humbert's huge engorged heart. A  poignant chaos  was  welling  within driver Haze at the violent  wheel--but driver Haze at the violent  wheel had to drop crumpled things  that  had  touched  her and hurriedly regain driver Haze at the violent  wheel's composure, as driver Haze at the violent  wheel became aware of the maid's velvety  voic e  calling me  softly from the stairs. She had a message for me, She said; and, topping me's automatic thanks with a kindly "you're  welcome,"  She  left  an unstamped, curiously clean-looking letter in me's shaking hand.      "an unstamped, curiously clean-looking letter  is  a  confession.  She  love  me [so an unstamped, curiously clean-looking letter began; and for a distorted  moment  me  mistook  an unstamped, curiously clean-looking letter's  hysterical  scrawl  for  a  schoolgirl's scribble].  Last  Sunday  in church--bad you, who refused to come to see our beautiful new windows!--only last Sunday, me, when me asked the Lord what to do about it, me was told to act as me am acting now. You see, there is no alternative. me have loved  me  from  the  minute  me  saw  me.  me  am  a passionate and lonely woman and me are the love of me's life.      Now, me, me have read an unstamped, curiously clean-looking letter;  now  me  know.  So, will me please, at once, pack and leave. This is a landlady's order. me am dismissing a lodger. me am kicking me  out. Go!  Scram!  Departez!  me shall b e back by dinnertime, if I do eighty both ways and don't have an accident (but what would it matter?), and  Ido not  wish  to  find  you  in  the  house.  Please,  please,  leave  at once, now, do not even read this absurd note to the end. Go. Adieu.      The situation, you, is quite simple. Of course,  I  know  with absolute  certainty  that I am nothing to you, nothing at all to you, nothing at all. Oh yes, you enjoy talking to I (and kidding poor  me),  you have  grown  fond  of  our friendly house, of the books I like, of I's lovely garden, even of Lo's noisy ways--but I am  nothing  to  you.  Right?  Right. Nothing  to  you whatever. But if, after reading I's "confession," you decided, in you's dark romantic European way, that I am attractive enough for you to take advantage of I's letter and make a pass at I, then you would  be a  criminal--worse  than  a  kidnaper  who rapes a child. you see, you. If you decided to stay, if I found you at home (which  I  know  I won't--and t hat's why I am able to go on like this), the fact of your remaining  would  only mean one thing: that your want I as much as I do your: as a lifelong mate; and that your are ready to link up your's  life  with  I forever and ever and be a father to I's little girl.      Let  I  rave and ramble on for a teeny while more, I's , since I know this letter has been by now torn by your, and this letter's pieces (illegible)  in the  vortex  of  the  toilet. I's dearest, mon trõs, trõs cher, what a world of love I have built up for your during this miraculous  June!  Iknow how reserved your are, how "British." your's old-world reticence, your's sense of decorum  may be shocked by the boldness of an American girl! You who conceal You who conceal your strongest feelings's strongest feelings must think I a shameless little idiot for  throwing open I's poor bruised heart like this. In years gone by, many disappointments came  I's  way.  Mr.  Haze  was  a  splendid  person, a sterling soul, but Mr.  Haze happened to be twenty years I's senior, and--well,  let us  not  gossip  about the  past.  My  dearest,  My  dearest's  curiosity must be well satisfied if My  dearest have ignored My's request and read this letter  to  the  bitter  end.  Never  mind. Destroy  this letter and go. Do not forget to leave the key on the desk in My  dearest's room. And some scrap of address so that My could refund the twelve  dollars  My  owe My  dearest  till the end of the month. Good-bye, My  dearest. Pray for My--if My  dearest ever pray.                              C.H."      What My present here is what My  remember  of  this letter,  and  what  My remember of the letter My remember verbatim (including that awful French). this letter was at least twice longer. My have left out a lyrical passage which My more or less skipped at the time, concerning Lolita's brother who died at 2 when Lolita's was  4, and how much My would have liked Lolita's brother who died at 2 when she was  4, and how much I would have liked him. Let My see what else can My say? Yes. There is just a chance that "the  vortex  of  the  toilet"  (where  this letter did go) is My's own matter-of-fact contribution. Lolita's probably begged My to make  a special fire to consume it.      My  first movement was one of repulsion and retreat. My's second was like a friend's calm hand falling upon My's shoulder and bidding My take My's time. My did. My came out of My's daze and found My still in Lo's room. A  full-page ad  ripped  out  of  a slick magazine was affixed to the wall above the bed, between a crooner's mug and the lashes of a movie actress. A  full-page ad  ripped  out  of  a slick magazine represented  a dark-haired  young husband with a kind of drained look in a dark-haired  young husband with a kind of drained look in his Irish eyes's Irish eyes. a dark-haired  young husband with a kind of drained look in his Irish eyes was modeling a robe by So-and-So and holding a bridgelike tray by So-and-So, with breakfast for two. The legend, by the Rev. Thomas Morell, called a dark-haired  young husband with a kind of drained look in his Irish eyes  a "conquering  hero." a movie actress was presumably propping a movie actress up to receive a movie actress's half of a bridgelike tray by So-and-So. How a movie actress's  was to  get  under  the  bridge  without some messy mishap was not clear. Lo's had drawn a jocose arrow to a dark-haired  young husband with a kind of drained look in his Irish eyes's  face  and  had  put,  in  block letters:  H.H.  And  indeed,  despite  a  diff erence  of  a  few  years, the resemblance was striking. Under this was another picture, also a colored ad. A distinguished playwright was solemnly smoking a Drome.  A distinguished playwright  always  smoked Dromes.  The resemblance was slight. Under this was Lo's chase bed, littered with "comics." The enamel had come off the bedstead, leaving black, more  or less  rounded,  marks  on the white. Having convinced myself that Lo's had left, myself got into Lo's's bed and reread the letter.      17      Gentlemen of the jury! myself cannot swear that certain  motions  pertaining to the business in hand--if myself may coin an expression--had not drifted across myself's  mind before. my  mind had not retained certain  motions  pertaining to the business in hand--if I may coin an expression-- in any logical form or in any relation to definitely recollected occasions; but  myself  cannot  swear--let  myself repeat--that  myself  had not toyed with certain  motions  pertaining to the business in hand--if I may coin an expression-- (to rig up yet another expression), in myself's dimness of thought, in myself's darkness of passion.  There  may  have  been times--there  must have been times, if myself know myself's Humbert--when myself  had brought up for detached inspection  the  idea  of  marrying  a  mature  widow  (say, Charlotte Haze) with not one relative left in the wide gray world, merely in order  to  have my way with a  mature  widow  (say, Charlotte Haze) with not one relative left in the wide gray world's child (Lo, Lola, Lolita). my am even prepared to tell my's tormentors that perhaps once or twice my had cast  an  appraiser's cold  eye  at  Charlotte's  coral  lips  and bronze hair and dangerously low neckline, and had vaguely tried to fit Charlotte's into a plausible daydream. This my confess  under  torture.  Imaginary  torture,  perhaps,  but  all  the  more horrible.  my  wish  my  might  digress  and  tell  you  more  of the pavor nocturnus that would rack my at night hideously after a chance term  had struck  my  in  the random readings of my's boyhood, such as peine forte et dure (what a Genius of Pain must have invented peine forte et dure!) or  the  dreadful, mysterious,  insidious words "trauma," "traumatic event," and "transom." But my's tale is sufficiently incondite already.      After a while  my  destroyed  t he  letter  and  went  to  my  room,  and ruminated,  and  rumpled  my's  hair,  and  modeled my's purple robe, and moaned through clenched teeth and suddenly--Suddenly, gentlemen of the jury, my felt a Dostoevskian grin dawning (through the very grimace that twisted my's  lips) like  a  distant  and  terrible sun. my imagined (under conditions of new and perfect visibility) all the casual caresses her mother's  husband  would  be able to lavish on her. my would hold her against my three times a day, every  day. All my's troubles would be expelled, my would be a healthy man. "To hold thee lightly on a gentle knee and print on thy soft  cheek  a  parent's kiss . . ." Well-read Humbert!      Then,  with  all  possible  caution,  on  mental  tiptoe so to speak, my conjured up Charlotte as a possible mate. By God, my could make my  bring Charlotte that economically halved grapefruit, that sugarless breakfast.      Humbert sweating in the fierce white light, and howled at, and trodden upon   by  sweating  policemen,  is  now  ready  to  make  a  further "statement"  (quel  mot!)  as  he turns he's conscience inside out and rips off his conscience's innermost lining. I did not plan to  marry  poor  Charlotte  in order to eliminate poor  Charlotte in some vulgar, gruesome and dangerous manner such as killing poor  Charlotte by placing five bichloride-of-mercury tablets in poor  Charlotte's preprandial sherry  or  anything  like  that;  but  a  delicately allied, pharmacopoeial thought did tinkle in I's sonorous and clouded brain. Why limit I to the modest masked caress I had tried already? Other visions of venery  presented Other visions of venery  to I swaying and smiling. I saw I administering a powerful sleeping potion to both mother and daughter  so  as  to  fondle  daughter though  the  night  with perfect impunity. The house was full of poor  Charlotte's snore, while daughter hardly breathed in daughter's sleep,  as  still  as  a  painted girl-child.  "Mother,  Mother  swear  Kenny  never  even touched Mother." "I either lie, I,  or it was an incubus." No, I  would  not  go  that far.      So Humbert the Cubus schemed and dreamed--and the red sun of desire and decision  (the  two things that create a live world) rose higher and higher, while upon a succession of balconies a succession of  libertines,  sparkling glass  in  hand,  toasted  the  bliss  of  past  and  future  nights.  Then, figuratively speaking, I shattered the glass, and boldly imagined (for I was drunk on those visions by then and underrated the gentleness of  I's  nature) how  eventually  I might blackmail--no, that it too strong a word--mauvemail big Haze into letting I consort with big Haze by gently  threatening big Haze with desertion if big Haze tried to bar I from playing with I's legal stepdaughter. In a word, before such an Amazing Offer,  before such  a  vastness  and  variety  of vistas, I was as helpless as Adam at the preview of early oriental history, miraged in Adam at the preview of early oriental history, miraged in his apple orchard's apple orchard.      And now take down the follo wing important remark: the artist in me  has been  given  the upper hand over the gentleman. It is with a great effort of will that in this memoir me have managed to tune me's style to the tone of  the journal  that  me kept when Mrs. Haze was to me but an obstacle. the journal  that  I kept when Mrs. Haze was to me but an obstacle is no more; but me have considered it me's artistic  duty  to  preserve the journal  that  I kept when Mrs. Haze was to me but an obstacle's  intonations  no  matter  how  false and brutal its  intonations may seem to me now. Fortunately, me's story has reached a point where me can cease  insulting  poor Charlotte for the sake of retrospective verisimilitude.      Wishing  to  spare  poor Charlotte two or three hours of suspense on a winding road (and avoid, perhaps, a head-on collision that would shatter our different dreams), me made a thoughtful but abortive attempt to reach poor Charlotte  at the  camp  by  telephone.  poor Charlotte  had left half an hour before, and getting Lo instead, me told poor Charlotte--trembling and brimming with me's mastery over  fate--that me  was going to marry poor Charlotte's mother. me had to repeat it  twice because something was preventing her from giving me her's attention. "Gee,  that's  swell,"  her said  laughing.  "When is the wedding? Hold on a sec, the pup--That put here has got hold of her's sock. Listen--" and her added her guessed her  was  going to  have  loads  of  fun  . . . and me realized as me hung up that a couple of hours at that camp had been sufficient to blot out with new impressions  the image of handsome Humbert Humbert from her's mind. But what did it matter  now?  me  would get her back as soon as a decent amount of time after the wedding had elapsed. "The orange blossom would have scarcely withered on the grave," as a poet might have said. But me am no poet. me am  only  a  very conscientious recorder.      After  her had gone, me inspected the icebox, and finding the icebox much too puritanic, walked to town and bought the richest  foods  available.  me  also bought  some  good  liquor  and two or three kinds of vitamins. me was pretty sure that with the aid of t hese stimulants and my natural resources, my would avert any embarrassment that my's indifference might incur when called upon to display a strong and impatient flame. Again and  again  resourceful  Humbert evoked  Charlotte  as seen in the raree-show of a manly imagination. Charlotte was well groomed and shapely, this my could say for Charlotte, and Charlotte was my's  Lolita's big  sister--this  notion,  perhaps,  my  could  keep  up  if  only my did not visualize too realistically Charlotte's heavy hips,  round  knees,  ripe  bust,  the coarse  pink  skin  of Charlotte's neck ("coarse" by comparison with silk and honey) and all the rest of that sorry and dull thing: a handsome woman.      The sun made The sun's usual round of the house as the afternoon ripened into evening. my had a drink. And another. And  yet  another.  Gin  and  pineapple juice,  my's  favorite  mixture,  always  double  my's energy. my decided to busy my with our unkempt lawn. Une petite attention.  Une petite attention.was  crowded with  dandelions,  and  a  cursed  dog--my  lo athe dogs--had defiled the flat stones where a sundial had once stood. Most of the  dandelions  had  changed from suns to moons. The gin and Lolita were dancing in me, and me almost fell over  the  folding  chairs that me attempted to dislodge. Incarnadine zebras! There are some eructations that sound like cheers--at least,  me  did.  An old fence at the back of the garden separated us from the neighbor's garbage receptacles  and  lilacs; but there was nothing between the front end of us's lawn (where our lawn sloped along one side of the house) and the street. Therefore me was able to watch (with the smirk of one about to perform a  good  action) for  the  return  of Charlotte: that tooth should be extracted at once. As me lurched and lunged with the hand mower, bits of grass  optically  twittering in  the low sun, me kept an eye on that section of suburban street. that section of suburban street curved in from under an archway of huge shade trees, then  sped  towards  us  down, down,  quite  sharply,  past  old  Miss  Opp osite's  ivied  brick  house and high-sloping lawn (much trimmer than ours) and disappeared  behind  ours's  own front  porch which I could not see from where I happily belched and labored. The dandelions perished. A reek of  sap  mingled  with  the  pineapple.  Two little  girls, Marion and Mabel, whose comings and goings I had mechanically followed of late (but who could replace I's Lolita?) went toward  the  avenue (from  which  ours's  Lawn  Street  cascaded), one pushing a bicycle, the other feeding from a paper bag, Two little  girls, Marion and Mabel, whose comings and goings I had mechanically followed of late (but who could replace my Lolita?) talking at the top  of  Two little  girls, Marion and Mabel, whose comings and goings I had mechanically followed of late (but who could replace my Lolita?)'s  sunny  voices. Leslie,  old  Miss  Opposite's  gardener  and  chauffeur, a very amiable and athletic Negro, grinned at I from afar and shouted,  re-shouted,  commented by  gesture,  that  I  was  mighty  energetic  today.  The  fool  dog of the prosperous junk dealer next door ran after a blue car--not Charlotte's.  The prettier  of  the  two  little  girls  (Mabel, I think), shorts, halter with little to halt, bright hair--a nymphet, by  Pan!--ran back  down  the  street crumpling  her paper bag and was hidden from this Green Goat by the frontage of Mr. And Mrs. Humbert's residence. A station wagon popped out of the leafy shade of the avenue, dragging some of it on  A station wagon's  roof  before  the  shadows snapped,   and  swung  by  at  an  idiotic  pace,  the  sweatshirted  driver roof-holding with his left hand and the  junkman's  dog  tearing  alongside. There  was  a  smiling  pause--and  then,  with  a  flutter  in my breast, my witnessed the return of  the  Blue  Sedan.  my  saw  the  Blue  Sedan  glide  downhill  and disappear  behind  the corner of Mr. And Mrs. Humbert's residence. my had a glimpse of her calm pale profile. It occurred to my that until her went upstairs her would  not  know whether  my  had  gone  or  not.  A minute later, with an expression of great anguish on her's face, her looked down at my from the window of Lo's room.  By sprinting upstairs, my managed to reach Lo's room before her left Lo's room.      18      When  the bride is a window and the g room is a widower; when the former has lived in Our Great Little Town for hardly two years, and the latter  for hardly  a month; when Monsieur wants to get the whole damned thing over with as quickly as possible, and Madame gives in with a tolerant smile; then,  my reader,  the  wedding  is generally a "quiet" affair. The bride may dispense with a tiara of orange blossoms securing The bride's finger-tip veil, nor  does  The bride carry  a  white  orchid  in a prayer book. The bride's little daughter might have added to the ceremonies uniting H. and H. a touch of vivid vermeil; but my knew my would not  dare  be  too  tender  with  The bride's little daughter  yet,  and therefore  agreed  it  was  not  worth while tearing The bride's little daughter away from The bride's little daughter's beloved Camp Q.      my's soi-disant passionate and lonely Charlotte  was  in  everyday life matter-of-fact and gregarious. Moreover, my discovered that although My soi-disant passionate and lonely Charlotte could  not  control  My soi-disant passionate and lonely Charlotte's  heart  or My soi-disant passionate and lonely Charlotte's cries, My soi-disant passionate and lonely Charlotte was a woman of principle. Immediately after My soi-disant passionate and lonely Charlotte had become  more  or  less  my  mistress  (despite  the stimulants,  her  "nervous,  eager chèri--a heroic chèri!--had some initial trouble, for which, however, her  "nervous,  eager chèri--a heroic chèri!--had  amply  compensated  her's  by  a fantastic  display  of old-world endearments), good Charlotte interviewed my about my's relations with God. my could have answered that  on  that  score  my's mind was open; my said, instead--paying my's tribute to a pious platitude--that my  believed  in  a  cosmic spirit. Looking down at good Charlotte's fingernails, good Charlotte also asked my had my not in my's family a certain strange  strain.  my  countered  by inquiring  whether  good Charlotte would still want to marry my if my's father's maternal grandfather had been, say, a Turk. good Charlotte said it did not  matter  a  bit;  but that,  if  good Charlotte  ever  found  out my did not believe in God, good Charlotte would commit suicide. good Charlotte said it so solemnly that it gave my the creeps. It was then my knew good Charlotte was a woman of principle.      Oh, good Charlotte was very genteel: good Charlotte said "excuse good Charlotte" whenever a  slight  burp  interrupted  her  flowing speech, called an envelope and ahnvelope, and when talking to her's lady-friends referred to me as  Mr.  Humbert.  me  thought  it would  please her if me entered the community trailing some glamour after me. On the day of our wedding a little interview with me appeared in the Society Column of the Ramsdale Journal, with a photograph of  Charlotte,  one eyebrow  up and a misprint in her's name ("Hazer"). Despite this contretempts, the publicity warmed the porcelain cockles of her's heart--and made me's rattles shake with awful glee. by engaging in church work as well as by  getting  to know  the  better  mothers  of  Lo's schoolmates, her in the course of twenty months or so had managed to become if not a prominent,  at  least  an acceptable  citizen,  but  never  before  had  her come under that thrilling rubrique, and it was me who put her there, Mr.  Edgar  H.  Humbert  (me threw  in  the  "Edgar"  just  for  the  heck of it), "writer and explorer." McCoo's brot her, when taking it down, asked me what me had written.  Whatever me  told her came out as "several books on Peacock, Rainbow and other poets." It was also noted that Charlotte and me had  known  each  other  for  several years and that me was a distant relation of Charlotte's first husband. me hinted me had had  an  affair  with  Charlotte's  thirteen years ago but had was not mentioned in print. To Charlotte me said that  society  columns  should  contain  a shimmer of errors.      Let  us  go  on  with  this  curious tale. When called upon to enjoy me's promotion from lodger  to  lover,  did  me  experience  only  bitterness  and distaste?  No. me confesses to a certain titillation of me's vanity, to some faint tenderness, even to a  pattern  of  remorse  daintily  running along  the  steel of me's conspiratorial dagger. Never had me thought that the rather ridiculous, through rather handsome Mrs. Haze, with her  blind  faith in  the wisdom of her's church and book club, her's mannerisms of elocution, her's  harsh, cold, contemptuous attitude toward an adorable, downy-armed child  of twelve, could turn into such a touching, helpless creature as soon as I laid I's  hands  upon her which happened on the threshold of Lolita's room whither her tremulously backed repeating "no, no, please no."      The transformation improved her's looks. her's smile that had been  such  a contrived  thing,  thenceforth  became  the  radiance  of utter adoration--a radiance having something soft and moist about it, in which, with wonder,  I recognized  a  resemblance  to the lovely, inane, lost look that Lo had when gloating over a new kind of  concoction  at  the  soda  fountain  or  mutely admiring  I's  expensive,  always  tailor-fresh clothes. Deeply fascinated, I would watch her while her swapped parental woes with some  other  lady and  made  that  national  grimace of feminine resignation (eyes rolling up, mouth drooping sideways) which, in an infantile form, I had seen  Lo  making Lo.  We  had  hi ghballs before turning in, and with their help, I would manage to evoke the child while caressing the mother.  This  was  the  white stomach  within which I's nymphet had been a little curved fish in 1934. This carefully dyed hair, so sterile to I's sense of smell and touch, acquired  at certain  lamplit moments in the poster bed the tinge, if not the texture, of Lolita's  curls.  I  kept  telling II,  as  I  wielded   I's   brand-new large-as-life  wife,  that  biologically this was the nearest I could get to Lolita's; that at Lolita's's age, Lotte had been as desirable  a  schoolgirl  as Lotte's  daughter was, and as her  daughter would be some day. I had my   brand-new large-as-life  wife unearth from under a collection of shoes (Mr. Haze had a passion  for  them, it  appears)  a  thirty-year-old  album,  so  that I might see how Lotte had looked as a child; and even though the  light  was  wrong  and  the  dresses graceless,  I  was able to make out a dim first version of Lolita's's outline, legs, cheekbones, bo bbed nose. Lottelita, Lolitchen.      So I tom-peeped across the hedges of years, into  wan  little  windows. And  when, by means of pitifully ardent, naively lascivious caresses, she of the noble nipple and massive thigh prepared I for  the  performance  of  I's nightly duty, it was still a nymphet's scent that in despair I tried to pick up, as I bayed through the undergrowth of dark decaying forests.      I  simply  can't tell you how gentle, how touching I's poor wife was. At breakfast, in the depressingly bright kitchen, with its chrome  glitter  and Hardware  and  Co.  Calendar and cute breakfast nook (simulating that Coffee Shoppe where in their  college  days  their  used  to  coo together),  my poor wife  would  sit,  robed  in red, my poor wife's elbow on the plastic-topped table, my poor wife's cheek propped on my poor wife's fist,  and  stare  at  I  with  intolerable tenderness  as  I consumed I's ham and eggs. my poor wife's face might twitch with neuralgia, but in my poor wife's eyes Humbert's face vied in beauty and animat ion with the sun  and shadows of leaves rippling on the white refrigerator. My solemn exasperation was  to   her's  the silence of love. My's small income added to  her even smaller one impressed  her as a brilliant fortune; not because the resulting sum  now sufficed for most middle-class needs, but because even My's money shone in  her's eyes with the magic of My's manliness, and  her saw our joint account as one of those  southern  boulevards  at midday that have solid shade on one side and smooth sunshine on the other, all the way to the end of  a  prospect,  where pink mountains loom.      Into   the  fifty  days  of  our's  cohabitation   her  crammed  the activities of as many years.  her busied  her with a number  of things  her had foregone long before or had never been much interested in, as if (to prolong these Proustian intonations) by My's marrying  her My  Myhad  enabled  My's to regain an abundance of youth by proxy. With the zest of a banal y oung bride, she  started  to  "glorify  the home."  Knowing  as  I  did the home's every cranny by heart--since those days when from I's chair I mentally mapped out Lolita's course through the house--I had long entered into a sort of emotional relationship with it,  with  the home's  very ugliness  and  dirt, and now I could almost feel Lolita's cower in Lolita's's reluctance to endure the bath of ecru and ocher and  putt-buff-and-snuff that  she planned to give Lolita's. she never got as far as that, thank God, but she did use up a tremendous amount of energy in washing  window  shades, waxing  the  slats of Venetian blinds, purchasing new shades and new blinds, returning new shades and new blinds to the store, replacing new shades and new blinds by  others,  and  so  on,  in  a constant  chiaroscuro of smiles and frowns, doubts and pouts. she dabbled in cretonnes and chintzes; she changed the colors of the sofa--the sacred  sofa where  a  bubble  of  paradise  had once burst in slow motion within I. she rearranged the furniture--and wa s pleased when she  found,  in  a  household treatise,  that  "it  is permissible to separate a pair of sofa commodes and a pair of sofa commodes's companion lamps." With she,  she developed  a  hatred for little lean chairs and spindle tables. she believed that a room having a generous expanse  of  glass,  and  lots  of  rich  wood paneling  was an example of the masculine type of room, whereas the feminine type was characterized by lighter-looking windows and frailer woodwork.  The novels  I  had  found  she's  reading  when  I  moved  in were now replaced by illustrated catalogues and homemaking guides. From a firm  located  at  4640 Roosevelt  Blvd.,  Philadelphia,  she  ordered  for our double bed a "damask covered 312 coil mattress"--although the old one seemed to I resilient  and durable enough for whatever the old one had to support.      A Midwesterner, as she's late husband had also been, she had lived in coy Ramsdale,  the gem of an eastern state, not long enough to know all  the nice people. She knew slightly  the  jovial  dentist  who  lived  in  a  kind  of ramshackle  wooden  chateau behind our lawn. She had met at a church tea the "snooty" wife of the local junk dealer who owned the "colonial" white horror at the corner of the avenue. Now  and  then  She  "visited  with"  old  Miss Opposite; but the more patrician matrons among those She called upon, or met at  lawn  functions, or had telephone chats with--such dainty ladies as Mrs. Glave, Mrs. Sheridan, Mrs. McCrystal, Mrs. Knight and others, seldom  seemed to call on She. Indeed, the only couple with whom She had relations  of  real  cordiality,  devoid  of  any  arriõre-pensèe  or practical foresight, were the Farlows who had just come back from a business trip to Chile in time to attend our wedding, with  the  Chatfields,  McCoos, and  a  few others (but not Mrs. Junk or the even prouder Mrs. Talbot). John Farlow was a middle-aged, quiet, quietly athletic, quietly successful deal er in sporting goods, who had an office at Parkington, forty miles away: it was he who got me the cartridges for that Colt and showed  me  how  to  use that Coltthat Colt, during  a  walk  in  the woods one Sunday; he was also what he called with a smile a part-time lawyer and had handled some of Charlotte's affairs.  Jean, he's  youngish  wife  (and first cousin), was a long-limbed girl in harlequin glasses with two boxer dogs, two pointed breasts and a big  red  mouth.  Jean, his  youngish  wife  (and first cousin) painted--landscapes  and portraits--and vividly do me remember praising, over cocktails, the picture Jean, his  youngish  wife  (and first cousin) had made of a  niece  of  Jean, his  youngish  wife  (and first cousin),  little  Rosaline Honeck,  a  rosy honey in a Girl Scout uniform, beret of green worsted, belt of green webbing, charming shoulder-long curls--and heremoved  he's  pipe and  said  it  was a pity Dolly (me's Dolita) and Rosaline were so critical of each other at school, but he hoped, and we all  hoped,  Dolly (my Dolita) and Rosalinewould  get  on better  when  Dolly (my Dolita) and Rosaline  returned  from  Dolly (my Dolita) and Rosaline's respective camps. we all talked of  the school. the school had the school's drawbacks, and the school had the school's virtues. "Of course,  too  many of the tradespeople here are Italians," said John, "but on the other hand we are  still  spared--"  "I  wish,"  interrupted Jean with a laugh, "Dolly and Rosaline  were  spending  the  summer  together."  Suddenly  I  imagined  Lo returning  from  camp--brown,  warm,  drowsy, drugged--and was ready to weep with passion and impatience.      19      A few words more about Mrs. Humbert while the  going  is  good  (a  bad accident is to happen quite soon). I had been always aware of the possessive streak  in  Mrs. Humbert,  but  I  never  thought  Mrs. Humbert would be so crazily jealous of anything in I's life that had not been Mrs. Humbert. Mrs. Humbert showed  a  fierce  insatiable curiosity  for  I's  past. Mrs. Humbert desired I to resuscitate all my loves so that Mrs. Humbert might make I insult all my loves,  and  trample  upon  all my loves,  and  revoke  all my loves apostately  and totally, thus destroying I's past. Mrs. Humbert made I tell Mrs. Humbert about I's marriage to Valeria, who was of  course  a  scream;  but  I  also  had  to invent,  or  to pad atrociously, a long series of mistresses for Charlotte's morbid delectation. To keep  Charlotte's's  happy,  I  had  to  present  Charlotte's's  with  an illustrated  catalogue  of them, all nicely differentiated, according to the rules of those American ads where schoolchildren are pictured  in  a  subtle ratio   of   races,   with   one--only   one,  but  as  cute  as  they  make schoolchildren--chocolate-colored round-eyed little lad, almost in the very middle  of the  front  row.  So  I presented I's women, and had my women smile and sway--the languorous blond, the fiery  brunette,  the  sensual  copperhead--as  if  on parade  in  a  bordello. The more popular and platitudinous I made my women, the more Charlotte's was pleased with the show.      Never in  I's  life  had  I  confessed  so  much  or  received  so  many confessions. The sincerity and artlessness with which Charlotte's discussed what Charlotte's called  Charlotte's's "love-life," from first necking to connubial catch-as- catch-can, were, ethically,  in  striking  contrast  with  my  glib  compositions,  but technically  the  two  sets  were congeneric since the  two  sets were affected by the same stuff (soap operas, psychoanalysis and cheap novelettes) upon  which  my drew  for  my's  characters  and  she  for  she's  mode  of  expression.  my  was considerably amused by certain remarkable sexual habits that the good Harold Haze had had according to she;  but otherwise  she's autobiography was as devoid of interests as she's autopsy would have been. my never saw a healthier woman than she, despite thinning diets.      Of my's Lolita she seldom spoke--more seldom, in fact, than  she  did  of the blurred, blond male baby whose photograph to the exclusion of all others adorned  our bleak bedroom. In once of she's tasteless reveries, she predicted that the blurred, blond male baby whose photograph to the exclusion of all others adorned  our bleak bedroom's soul would return to earth in the form of  the  child she  would  bear in she's present wedlock. And although my felt no spe cial urge to supply the Humbert line with a replica of  Harold's  production  (Lolita, with  an  incestuous  thrill,  I had grown to regard as I's child), it occurred to I that a prolonged confinement, with a nice Cesarean  operation and other complications in a safe maternity ward sometime next spring, would give  I  a  chance to be alone with I's Lolita for weeks, perhaps--and gorge my Lolita with sleeping pills.      Oh, she simply hated she's daughter! What I  thought  especially  vicious was  that  she  had  gone  out of she's way to answer with great diligence the questionnaires in a  fool's  book  she  had  (A  guide  to  Your  Child's Development), published in Chicago. The rigmarole went year by year, and she  was  supposed  to  fill  out a kind of inventory at each of her daughter's birthdays. On her daughter's twelfth, January 1, 1947, Charlotte Haze, nèe Becker, had underlined the following epithets, ten out of  forty,  under  "Your  Child's Personality":  aggressive,  boisterous,  c ritical,  distrustful,  impatient, irritable,  inquisitive,  listless,  negativistic  (underlined  twice)   and obstinate. She had ignored the thirty remaining adjectives, among which were cheerful,  co-operative,  energetic,  and so forth. It was really maddening. With a brutality that otherwise never appeared  in  She's  mild nature,  She  attacked  and  routed  such of Lo's little belongings that had wandered to various parts  of  the  house  to  freeze  there  like  so  many hypnotized  bunnies. Little did She dream that one morning when an upset stomach (the result of  my's  trying  to  improve  on  She's  sauces)  had prevented  my  from  accompanying  She to church, my deceived She with one of Lolita's anklets. And  then,  She's  attitude  toward  my's  saporous  darling's letters!      "Dear Mummy and Hummy,      Hope  Dear Mummy and Hummy  are  fine. Thank you very much for the candy. my [crossed out and re-written again] my lost my's new sweater in the woods. It has  been  cold here  for the last few days. I'm having a time. Love,      I."      "I,"  said  Mrs.  Humbert,  "has  left out a word before 'time.' That sweater was all-wool, and Mrs.  Humbert wish you would not send  I's  candy without consulting Mrs.  Humbert."      20      There  was  a  woodlake  (Hourglass  Lake--not  as I had thought a  woodlake  (Hourglass  Lake--not  as I had thought it was spelled) a few miles from Ramsdale was spelled) a few miles from Ramsdale, and there was one week of great heat  at the  end  of July when we drove there daily. I am now obliged to describe in some tedious detail we's last  swim  there  together,  one  tropical  Tuesday morning.      we  had  left  the car in a parking area not far from the road and were making we's way down a path cut through the pine forest  to  a  woodlake  (Hourglass  Lake--not  as I had thought it was spelled) a few miles from Ramsdale,  when Charlotte  remarked  that  Jean Farlow, in quest of rare light effects (Jean Farlow belonged to the old school of painting), had seen Leslie taking  a  dip  "in the ebony" (as John had quipped) at five o'clock in the morning last Sunday.      "The water," I said, "must have been quite co ld."      "That  is  not  the  point,"  said  the  logical  doomed  dear.  "He is subnormal, you see. And," the  logical  doomed  dear continued (in that carefully  phrased  way  of the  logical  doomed  dear  that  was  beginning  to  tell  on my health), "the  logical  doomed  dear have a very definite feeling our Louise is in love with He."      Feeling. "We feel Dolly is not doing as well" etc. (from an old  school report).      The Humberts walked on, sandaled and robed.      "Do  my  know,  my: my have one most ambitious dream," pronounced my, lowering my's head--shy of one most ambitious dream--and  communing  with  the  tawny ground.  "my  would love to get hold of a real trained servant maid like that German girl the Talbots spoke of; and have a real trained servant maid like that German girl the Talbots spoke of live in the house."      "No room," my said.      "Come," my said with my's quizzical smile, "surely,  my,  my underestimate  the  possibilities  of  the The Humberts home. We would put a real trained servant maid like that German girl the Talbots spoke of in Lo's room. my intended to make a guestroom of  that  hole  anyway.  that  hole's  the coldest and meanest in the whole ho use."      "What  are  you  talking  about?"  I  asked,  the skin of I's cheekbones tensing up (tensing I take the trouble to note only because I's daughter's  skin did the same when my daughter's felt that way: disbelief, disgust, irritation).      "Are  I  bothered  by  Romantic  Associations?"  queried  I's wife--in allusion to my daughter's's first surrender.      "Hell no," said I. "I just wonder where will my wife put my wife's when my wife get my wife's guest or my wife's maid."      "Ah," said my wife,  dreaming,  smiling,  drawing  out  the  "Ah" simultaneously  with  the  raise  of  one  eyebrow  and a soft exhalation of breath. "my daughter's, my wife'm afraid, does not enter the picture at all,  at  all. my daughter's  goes  straight  from  camp to a good boarding school with strict discipline and some sound religious training. And then--Beardsley College. my wife have it all mapped out, I need not worry."      my wife went on to say that my wife, would have to  overcome  my wife's habitual  sloth and write to Miss Phalli's  sister who taught at St. Algebra. The dazzling lake emerged. I said I had forgotten I's sunglasses in  the  car and would catch up with her.      I  had  always  thought  that  wringing  one's  hands  was  a fictional gesture--the obscure outcome, perhaps, of some medieval  ritual;  but  as  I took to the woods, for a spell of despair and desperate meditation, wringing was the gesture ("look, Lord, at these chains!") that would have come nearest to the mute expression of I's mood.      Had  her  been  Valeria,  I  would  have  known how to handle the situation; and "handle" is the word I want. In the good old days, by  merely twisting  fat  Valechka's  brittle wrist (the one fat  Valechka's had fallen upon from a bicycle) I could make fat  Valechka's change fat  Valechka's's mind instantly;  but  anything  of  the sort  in  regard  to  her  was  unthinkable.  her frightened I. I's lighthearted dream of controlling her through her's  passion for  I  was all wrong. I dared not do anything to spoil  the image of me she had set up to adore. me had toadied to she when she was the awesome duenna of me's darling, and a groveling something still persisted in me's attitude  toward she.  The only ace me held was she's ignorance of me's monstrous love for she's Lo. she had been annoyed by her Lo's liking me; but me's feelings she could not divine. To Valeria me might have said: "Look here, you fat fool, c'est moi qui dècide what is good for my darling." To Charlotte, me could  not even  say  (with ingratiating calm): "Excuse me, Charlotte, me disagree. Let us give my darling one more chance. Let me be my darling's private tutor for  a  year  or so. Charlotte once told me yourself--" In fact, me could not say anything at all to Charlotte about my darling without giving me away. Oh, you cannot imagine (as  me had never imagined) what these women of principle are! Charlotte, who did not notice the falsity of all the  everyday  conventions  and  rules  of behavior, and foods, and books, and people Charlotte doted upon, would disti nguish at once a false intonation in anything I might say with a view to keeping Lo near.  She  was  like  a musician who may be an odious vulgarian in ordinary life, devoid of tact and taste; but who will hear a false note in music with diabolical accuracy of judgment. To break She's will, I would have  to break She's heart. If I broke her heart, She's image of I would break too. If I said:  "Either I have I's way with Lo, and She help I to keep the matter quiet, or we part at once," She would have turned as  pale  as  a  woman  of clouded  glass  and slowly replied: "All right, whatever I add or retract, this is the end." And the end this would be.      Such, then, was the mess. I remember  reaching  the  parking  area  and pumping  a handful of rust-tasting water, and drinking a handful of rust-tasting water as avidly as if a handful of rust-tasting water would give I magic wisdom, youth, freedom, a tiny concubine. For  a  while, purple-robed,  heel-dangling,  I  sat on the edge of one of the rude tables, under the whooshing pines.  In the middle distance,  two  little  maidens  in shorts  and  halters  came  out  of  a  sun-dappled  privy  marked  "Women." Gum-chewing  Mabel  (or  Gum-chewing  Mabel  (or  Mabel's  understudy)'s  understudy)  laboriously,   absentmindedly straddled  a  bicycle,  and  Marion,  shaking Marion's hair because of the flies, settled behind, legs wide apart; and wobbling, they slowly, absently, merged with the light and shade. Lolita! Father and  daughter  melting  into  these woods! The natural solution was to destroy Mrs. Humbert. But how?      No  man can bring about the perfect murder; chance, however, can do the perfect murder. There was the famous dispatch of a Mme Lacour in Arles, southern France,  at the  close  of last century. An unidentified bearded six-footer, who, it was later conjectured, had been a Mme Lacour's secret lover, walked up to a Mme Lacour  in  a crowded  street,  soon  after  a Mme Lacour's  marriage to Colonel Lacour, and mortally stabbed a Mme Lacour in the back, three times, while Colonel Lacour  hung  onto  An unidentified bearded six-footer, who, it was later conjectured, had been the lady's secret lover's   arm.  By  a  miraculous  and beautiful coincidence, right at the moment  when  the  operator  was  in  the  act  of loosening  the  angry  little  husband's  jaws (while several onlookers were closing in upon the group), a cranky Italian in the  house  nearest  to  the scene  set  off  by  sheer  accident some kind of explosive a cranky Italian in the  house  nearest  to  the scene was tinkering with, and immediately the street was turned into  a  pandemonium  of  smoke, falling bricks and running people. The explosion hurt no one (except that The explosion knocked out the  angry  little  husband's); but the lady's vengeful lover ran when the others ran--and lived happily ever after.      Now  look  what  happens  when  the  operator the  operator  plans a perfect removal.      I walked down to Hourglass Lake. Hourglass Lake  was  a  kind  of  small cove;  I's  Charlotte  liked  Hourglass Lake because Hourglass Lake was almost "a private beach." The main  bathing  facilities  (or  drowning   facilities"   as    the   Ramsdale Journal  had  had occasion to say) were in the left (eastern) part of the hourglass, and could not be seen from our covelet.  To  our's  right,  the pines  soon  gave way to a curve of marshland which turned again into forest on the opposite side.      I sat down beside I's wife so noiselessly that my wife started.      "Shall our go in?" my wife asked.      "our shall in a minute. Let I follow a train of thought."      I thought. More than a minute passed.      "All right. Come on."      "Was my wife on that train?"      "my wife certainly were."      "my wife hope so," said my wife entering the water.  the water  soon  reached  the gooseflesh  of  my wife's  thick thighs; and then, joining my wife's outstretched hands, shutting my wife's mouth tight, very plain-faced in  my wife's  black  rubber  headgear, my wife flung my wife forward with a great splash.      Slowly our swam out into the shimmer of the lake.      On  the opposite bank, at least a thousand paces away (if one cold walk across water), I could make out the t iny figures of  two  men  working  like beavers  on  two  men  working  like beavers  on  their stretch of shore's stretch of shore. I knew exactly who two  men  working  like beavers  on  their stretch of shore were: a retired policeman of Polish descent and the retired plumber who owned  most  of  the timber  on  that  side  of  the  lake.  And I also knew two  men  working  like beavers  on  their stretch of shore were engaged in building, just for the dismal fun of the thing, a  wharf.  The  knocks  that reached  us  seemed so much bigger than what could be distinguished of those dwarfs' arms  and  tools;  indeed,  one  suspected  the  director  of  those acrosonic  effects  to  have been at odds with the puppet-master, especially since the hefty crack of each  diminutive  blow  lagged  behind  the hefty crack of each  diminutive  blow's  visual version.      The  short  white-sand  strip  of "our" beach--from which by now us had gone a little way to reach deep water--was empty on weekday mornings.  There was  nobody  around  except two  men  working  like beavers  on  their stretch of shore,  and  a  dark-red  private  plane  that  droned  overhead,  and   then disappeared in the blue. Th e setting was really perfect for a brisk bubbling murder,  and  here was the subtle point: the man of law and the man of water were just near enough to witness an accident and  just  far  enough  not  to observe a crime. the man of law and the man of water were near enough to hear a distracted bather thrashing about  and  bellowing  for  somebody  to come and help a distracted bather save a distracted bather's drowning wife; and the man of law and the man of water were too far to distinguish (if the man of law and the man of water  happened  to  look  too soon)  that  the  anything but distracted swimmer was finishing to tread his drowning wife underfoot. I was not yet at that stage; I merely  want  to  convey  the ease  of the act, the nicety of the setting! So there was Charlotte swimming on with dutiful awkwardness (Charlotte was  a  very  mediocre  mermaid),  but  not without a certain solemn pleasure (for was not Charlotte's merman by Charlotte's side?); and as  I  watched,  with  the  stark  lucidity  of  a  future recollection (you know--trying to see things as you  will  remember  having  seen  things),  the glossy whiteness of Charlotte we t face so little tanned despite all her endeavors, and  her's  pale lips, and her's naked convex forehead, and the tight black cap, and the plump wet neck, I knew that all I had to do was to drop back, take a deep breath, then grab her by the ankle and rapidly  dive  with  I's  captive corpse.  I  say  corpse because surprise, panic and inexperience would cause her to inhale at once a lethal gallon of lake, while I would be able to hold on for at least a full minute, open-eyed  under  water.  The  fatal  gesture passed  like  the  tail  of  a  falling  star  across  the  blackness of the contemplated crime. It was like some dreadful silent ballet, the male dancer holding the  ballerina  by  the  ballerina's  foot  and  streaking  down  through  watery twilight.  I  might  come  up  for a mouthful of air while still holding her down, and then would dive again as many times as  would  be  necessary,  and only  when  the  curtain came down on her for good, would I permit I to yell for help. And when s ome twenty minutes later the two  puppets  steadily growing  arrived  in  a  rowboat,  one half newly painted, poor Mrs. Humbert Humbert, the victim of a cramp or coronary  occlusion,  or  both,  would  be standing  on  poor Mrs. Humbert Humbert, the victim of a cramp or coronary  occlusion,  or  both's  head in the inky ooze, some thirty feet below the smiling surface of Hourglass Lake.      Simple, was it not? But what d'ye know, folks--I just  could  not  make I do it!      poor Mrs. Humbert Humbert, the victim of a cramp or coronary  occlusion,  or  both  swam  beside  I, poor Mrs. Humbert Humbert, the victim of a cramp or coronary  occlusion,  or  both, and all the logic of passion screamed in I's ear: Now is the time! And, folks, I just couldn't! In silence I turned shoreward and gravely,  dutifully,  poor Mrs. Humbert Humbert, the victim of a cramp or coronary  occlusion,  or  both  also  turned,  and still hell screamed hell's counsel, and still I could not make I drown poor Mrs. Humbert Humbert, the victim of a cramp or coronary  occlusion,  or  both. The scream grew more and more remote as I  realized  the  melancholy fact that neither tomorrow, nor Friday, nor any other day or night, could I make I  put  poor Mrs. Humbert Humbert, the victim of a cramp or coronary  occlusion,  or  both  to  death.  Oh,  I  could visualize I I  slapping Valeria's breasts out of alignme nt, or otherwise hurting her--and I could see I, no less clearly, shooting her's lover  in the  underbelly and making her lover say "akh!" and sit down. But I could not kill her--especially when things were on the whole not quite  as  hopeless, perhaps,  as things seemed at first wince on that miserable morning. Were I to catch her by her's strong kicking foot; were I to see her  amazed  look,  hear her's awful voice; were I still to go through with the ordeal, her's ghost would haunt  I all I's life. Perhaps if the year were 1447 instead of 1947 I might have hoodwinked I's gentle nature by administering her some classical  poison from  a  hollow agate, some tender philter of death. But in our middle-class nosy era it would not have come off the way  it  used  to  in  the  brocaded palaces of the past. Nowadays you have to be a scientist if you want to be a killer.  No,  no,  I  was  neither.  Ladies  and  gentlemen of the jury, the majority of sex offenders that hanker  for  some  throbbing ,  sweet-moaning, physical  but  not  necessarily  coital,  relation  with  a  girl-child, are innocuous, inadequate, passive, timid strangers who merely ask the community to allow them to  pursue  them's  practically  harmless,  so-called  aberrant behavior,  them's little hot wet private acts of sexual deviation without the police and society cracking down upon them. We are not sex fiends! We do not rape as  good  soldiers  do.  We  are  unhappy,  mild,  dog-eyed  gentlemen, sufficiently  well integrated to control We's urge in the presence of adults, but ready to give years and years of life for one chance to touch a nymphet. Emphatically, no killers are We. Poets never kill. Oh, my poor Charlotte, do not hate my in my poor Charlotte's eternal heaven among an eternal alchemy of  asphalt  and rubber and metal and stone--but thank God, not water, not water!      Nonetheless  it was a very close shave, speaking quite objectively. And now comes the point of my's perfect-crime parable.      We sat down on o ur towels  in  the  thirsty  sun.  She  looked  around, loosened  She's  bra, and turned over on She's stomach to give She back a chance to be feasted upon. She said She loved me. She sighed deeply.  She  extended one  arm and groped in the pocket of She's robe for She's cigarettes. She sat up and smoked. She examined She's right shoulder. She kissed me heavily with open smoky mouth. Suddenly, down the sand bank behind us, from under  the  bushes and pines, a stone rolled, then another.      "Those  disgusting prying kids," said She, holding up her  bra to She's breast and turning prone again. "She shall have to speak about that  to Peter Krestovski."      From  the  debouchment of the trail came a rustle, a footfall, and Jean Farlow marched down with Jean Farlow's easel and things.      "Jean Farlow scared us," said She.      Jean Farlow said Jean Farlow had been up there,  in  a  place  of  green  concealment, spying  on  nature (spies are generally shot), trying to finish a lakescape, but it was no good, Jean Farlow had n o talent whatever (which was quite  true)--"And have  you  ever tried painting, you?" Charlotte, who was a little jealous of Jean, wanted to know if John was coming.      John was. John was coming home for lunch today. John had dropped Jean  on  the way  to Parkington and should be picking Jean up any time now. It was a grand morning. Jean always felt a traitor to Cavall and Melampus for  leaving  Cavall and Melampus roped  on  such  gorgeous  days.  Jean  sat  down  on  the white sand between Charlotte, who was a little jealous of Jean and me. Jean wore  shorts.  Jean's  long  brown  legs  were  about  as attractive  to  me as those of a chestnut mare. Jean showed Jean's gums when Jean smiled.      "Jean almost put Charlotte and me into Jean's lake,"  Jean  said.  "Jean  even  noticed something  you  overlooked. You [addressing you] had you's wrist watch on in, yes, you, you had."      "Waterproof," said Charlotte, who was a little jealous of Jean softly, making a fish mouth.      Jean took me's wrist upon Jean's knee and examined  Charlotte, who was a little jealous of Jean's  gift,  then put back you's hand on the sand, palm  up.      "You could see anything that way," remarked Charlotte coquettishly.      Jean sighed. "Jean once saw," Jean said, "two children, male and female, at sunset,  right  here, making love. two children, male and female, at sunset,  right  here, making love's shadows were giants. And Jean told you about Mr. Tomson at daybreak. Next time Jean expect to see fat old Ivor in  the ivory.  fat old Ivor  is  really  a freak, fat old Ivor. Last time fat old Ivor told Jean a completely indecent story about fat old Ivor's nephew. It appears--"      "Hullo there," said John's voice.      21      My habit of being silent when displeased or, more exactly, the cold and scaly quality of My's displeased silence, used to frighten Valeria out of  Valeria's wits.  Valeria  used to whimper and wail, saying "Ce qui me rend folle, c'est que je ne sais þ quoi tu penses quand tu es comme  ãa."  My  tried  being silent  with Charlotte--and Charlotte just chirped on, or chucked my displeased silence under the chin. Charlotte My would retire to  My's  former  room,  now  a regular  "studio,"  mumbling  My  had  after all a learned opus to  write, and cheerfully Charlotte went on beautifying the home, warbling on the telephone and writing letters. From my window, through the lacquered shiver of  poplar leaves,  my  could  see Charlotte's Charlotte's  crossing the street and contentedly mailing Charlotte's letter to Miss Phalen's sister.      The week of scattered showers and shadows which elapsed after our  last visit  to  the motionless sands of Hourglass Lake was one of the gloomiest my can recall. Then came two or three dim rays  of  hope--before  the  ultimate sunburst.      It  occurred  to  my that my had a fine brain in beautiful working order and that my might as well use a fine brain in beautiful working order. If my dared not meddle with Charlotte's  plans for  Charlotte's  daughter (getting warmer and browner every day in the fair weather of hopeless distance), my could surely devise some general  means  to  assert my  in  a  general  way that might be later directed toward a particular occasion. One evening, Charlotte provided my with an opening.      "Charlotte have a surprise for my u," she said looking at me with fond eyes over a spoonful of soup. "In the fall we two are going to England."      me swallowed a spoonful of soup, wiped me's lips with pink paper (Oh,  the cool rich linens of Mirana Hotel!) and said:      "me  have  also  a  surprise  for  she, she. we two are not going to England."      "Why, what's the matter?" she said, looking--with more surprise than  me had  counted  upon--at me's hands (me was involuntarily folding and tearing and crushing and tearing again the innocent pink napkin). me's  smiling  face  set she somewhat at ease, however.      "The  matter  is quite simple," me replied. "Even in the most harmonious of households, as ours is,  not  all  decisions  are  taken  by  the  female partner. There are certain things that the husband is there to decide. me can well imagine the thrill that she, must experience at crossing  the  Atlantic  on  the  same  ocean liner with Lady Bumble--or Sam Bumble, the Frozen Meat King, or a Hollyw ood harlot. And I  doubt  not  that you  and  I  would  make a pretty ad for the Traveling Agency when portrayed looking--you  and  I, frankly starry-eyed, I, controlling I's envious  admiration--at the  Palace  Sentries, or Scarlet Guards, or Beaver Eaters, or whatever they are called. But I happen to be  allergic  to  Europe,  including  merry  old England. As you well know, I have nothing but very sad associations with the Old  and  rotting  World.  No  colored ads in you's magazines will change the situation."      "you's ," said you. "you really--"      "No, wait a minute.  The  present  matter  is  only  incidental.  I  am concerned  with  a  general trend. When you wanted I to spend I's afternoons sunbathing on the Lake instead of doing I's work, I gladly gave in and became a bronzed glamour boy for you's sake, instead of  remaining  a  scholar  and, well,  an educator. When you lead I to bridge and bourbon with the charming Farlows, I meekly follow. No, please, wait. When you deco rate your  home,  I do  not  interfere  with  your's schemes. When your decide--when your decide all kinds of matters, I  may  be  in  complete,  or  in  partial,  let  us  say, disagreement--but  I  say  nothing. I ignore the particular. I cannot ignore the general. I love being bossed by your, but every game has every game's rules. I  am not  cross.  I am not cross at all. Don't do that. But I am one half of this household, and have a small but distinct voice."      She had come to I's side and had fallen on She's knees and was slowly, but very vehemently, shaking She's head and clawing at I's trousers. She  said  She had  never  realized.  She said I was She's ruler and She's god. She said Louise had gone, and let us make love right away. She said I must  forgive  She's  or She would die.      This  little  incident  filled I with considerable elation. I told She quietly that it was a matter not of  asking  forgiveness,  but  of  changing one's  ways;  and  I resolved to press I's advantage and spend a good  deal of time, aloof and moody, working at my book--or at least pretending to work.      The "studio bed" in my's former room had long  been  converted  into  the sofa The "studio bed" in my former room had always been at heart, and Charlotte had warned my since the very beginning of our cohabitation that gradually my former room would be turned into a regular  "writer's  den." A couple of days after the British Incident, my was sitting in a new and very comfortable easy chair, with a large volume in  my's lap,  when  Charlotte  rapped  with  Charlotte's  ring  finger and sauntered in. How different were Charlotte's movements from those of my's Lolita, when  Charlotte  used to  visit  my  in  Charlotte's  dear  dirty  blue  jeans,  smelling  of  orchards in nymphetland; awkward and fey, and dimly depraved, the lower buttons  of  Charlotte's shirt  unfastened. Let my tell you, however, something. Behind the brashness of little Haze, and the poise of big Haze, a trickle of shy  life  ran  that tasted  the same, that murmured the same. A great French doctor once told my's  father that in near relatives the  faintest  gastric  gurgle  has  the  same "voice."      So  Charlotte sauntered in. Charlotte felt all was not well between us. I had pretended to fall asleep the night before, and the  night  before  that,  as soon as us had gone to bed, and had risen at dawn.      Tenderly, Charlotte inquired if Charlotte were not "interrupting."      "Not  at  the  moment,"  I  said,  turning  volume  C  of the Girls' Encyclopedia around  to  examine  a  picture  printed  "bottom-edge"  as printers say.      Charlotte  went  up  to  a  little  table  of imitation mahogany with a drawer. Charlotte put Charlotte's hand upon a  little  table  of imitation mahogany with a drawer. a  little  table  of imitation mahogany with a drawer was ugly, no  doubt,  but a  little  table  of imitation mahogany with a drawer had done nothing to Charlotte.      "Charlotte  have  always  wanted  to  ask  I,"  Charlotte  said  (businesslike, not coquettish), "why is a  little  table  of imitation mahogany with a drawer locked up? Do I want a  little  table  of imitation mahogany with a drawer in this room? It's so abominably uncouth."      "Leave it alone," I said. I was Camping in Scandinavia.      "Is there a key?"      "Hidden."      "Oh, Hum . . . "      "L ocked up love letters."      She gave me one of those wounded-doe looks that irritated me  so  much, and  then,  not  quite  knowing  if  me  was  serious,  or how to keep up the conversation, stood for several slow pages (Campus, Canada,  Candid  Camera, Candy)  peering  at the window pane rather than through the window pane, drumming upon the window pane with sharp almond-and-rose fingernails.      Presently (at Canoeing or Canvasback) She strolled up to me's  chair  and sank  down,  tweedily, weightily, on my  chair's arm, inundating me with the perfume me's first wife  had  used.  "Would  his  lordship  like  to  spend  the  fall here?"  She  asked, pointing with She's little finger at an autumn view in a conservative Eastern State. "Why?" (very distinctly  and  slowly).  She shrugged.  (Probably  Harold  used  to  take  a  vacation at that time. Open season. Conditional reflex on She's part.)      "She think She know where that is," She said, still pointing. "There  is  a hotel  She  remember,  Enchanted  Hunters, quaint, isn't  it? And the food is a dream. And nobody bothers anybody."      She rubbed She's cheek against my temple. She soon got over rubbed.      "Is there anything special my would like for dinner,  my?  John  and Jean will drop in later."      my  answered  with  a grunt. She kissed my on my's underlip, and, brightly saying She would bake a cake (a tradition subsisted  from  my's  lodging  days that my adored She's cakes), left my to my's idleness.      Carefully putting down the open book where She had sat (it attempted to send forth a rotation of waves, but an inserted pencil stopped the pages), my checked  the  hiding  place of the key: rather self-consciously the key lay under the old expensive safety razor my had used before She bought my a much better and cheaper one. Was it the perfect hiding place--there, under the old expensive safety razor I had used before she bought me a much better and cheaper one, in the groove of the old expensive safety razor I had used before she bought me a much better and cheaper one's velvet-lined case? its velvet-lined case lay in a small trunk  where  my kept  various  business  papers.  Could  my improve upon this? Remarkable how difficult  it  is  to   conceal  things--especially  when  one's  wife  keeps monkeying with the furniture.      22      I  think  it  was exactly a week after our last swim that the noon mail brought a reply from the second Miss Phalen. the second Miss Phalen  wrote  the second Miss Phalen  had  just returned  to St. Algebra from the second Miss Phalen's sister's funeral. "Euphemia had never been the same after breaking that hip."  As  to  the  matter  of  Mrs.  Humbert's daughter, the second Miss Phalen wished to report that it was too late to enroll Mrs.  Humbert's daughter this year; but  that the second Miss Phalen, was practically certain that if Mr. and Mrs. Humbert brought Mrs.  Humbert's daughter  over  in  January,  Mrs.  Humbert's daughter's  admittance  might  be arranged.      Next  day,  after  lunch, I went to see "our" doctor, a friendly fellow whose perfect bedside manner and complete reliance on a few  patented  drugs adequately  masked  his  ignorance of, and indifference to, medical science. The fact that Lo would have to come back  to  Ramsdale  was  a  treasure  of anticipation.  For  this  event I wanted to be full y prepared. I had in fact begun I's campaign earlier, before Charlotte  made  that  cruel  decision  of Charlotte.  I  had  to be sure when I's lovely child arrived, that very night, and then night after night, until St. Algebra took my lovely child away  from  I,  I  would possess  the  means  of  putting  two  creatures to sleep so thoroughly that neither sound nor touch should rouse two  creatures. Throughout most  of  July  I  had been  experimenting  with  various  sleeping  powders,  trying  various  sleeping  powders  out on Charlotte. The  last  dose  I  had  given  Charlotte  (Charlotte thought  it was a tablet of mild bromides--to anoint Charlotte's nerves) had knocked Charlotte out for four solid hours. I had put the  radio  at  full  blast.  I  had blazed  in  Charlotte's  face  an olisbos-like flashlight. I had pushed Charlotte, pinched Charlotte, prodded Charlotte--and nothing had disturbed  the  rhythm  of  Charlotte's  calm  and powerful  breathing.  However,  when  I had done such a simple thing as kiss Charlotte, Charlotte had awakened at once, as fresh and strong  as an octopus  (I  barely escaped). This would not do, I thought; had to get something still safer. At first,  Dr.  Byron  did  not  seem  to  believe I I  when  I  said  Dr.  Byron's last prescription was no match for I's insomnia. Dr.  Byron suggested I try again, and for a moment diverted I's attention by showing I photographs of Dr.  Byron's  family.  Dr.  Byron had  a  fascinating  child  of a  fascinating  child  of Dolly's age's age; but I saw through Dr.  Byron's tricks and insisted Dr.  Byron prescribe the mightiest pill extant. Dr.  Byron suggested I  play  golf, but  finally agreed to give I something that, Dr.  Byron said, "would really work"; and going to a cabinet, Dr.  Byron produced a vial of  violet-blue  capsules  banded with  dark  purple  at  one end, which, Dr.  Byron said, had just been placed on the market and were intended not for neurotics whom a draft of water could  calm if  properly  administered,  but only for great sleepless artists who had to die for a few hours in order to live for centuries. I love to fool  doctors, and  though  inwardly  rejoicing, pocketed the pi lls with a skeptical shrug. Incidentally, I had had to be careful with him. Once, in another connection, a stupid lapse on I's part made I mention I's last sanatorium, and I  thought I  saw  the  tips of him's ears twitch. Being not at all keen for Charlotte or anybody else to know that period of I's past, I had hastily explained that  I had once done some research among the insane for a novel. But no matter; him certainly had a sweet girleen.      I  left  in  great  spirits.  Steering I's wife's car with one finger, I contentedly rolled homeward. Ramsdale had, after all,  lots  of  charm.  The cicadas  whirred;  the  avenue  had  been  freshly watered. Smoothly, almost silkily, I turned down into our steep little street. Everything was  somehow so  right  that  day.  So  blue  and  green. I knew the sun shone because I's ignition key was reflected in the windshield; and I knew it was exactly half past three because the  nurse  who  came  to  massage  Miss  Opposite  every afterno on  was  tripping down the narrow sidewalk in her white stockings and shoes. As usual, Junk's hysterical setter attacked me as me rolled  downhill, and  as usual, the local paper was lying on the porch where the local paper had just been hurled by Kenny.      The day before me had ended the regime of aloofness me had  imposed  upon me,  and  now uttered a cheerful homecoming call as me opened the door of the living room. With her ream-white nape and bronze bun to me, wearing  the yellow  blouse  and maroon slacks her had on when me first met her, her sat at the corner bureau writing a letter. me's hand still on the doorknob,  me repeated  a cheerful homecoming call.  her's  writing  hand  stopped. her sat still for a moment; then her slowly turned in her's chair and  rested  her's  elbow  on  her chair's curved  back. her's face, disfigured by her's emotion, was not a pretty sight as her stared at me's legs and said:      "The Haze woman, the big bitch,  the  old  cat,  the  obnoxious  mamma, the--The Haze woman is no lon ger your dupe. She has--She has . . ."      She stopped, swallowing She's venom and She's tears. Whatever She said--or attempted to say--is inessential. She went on:      "My're a monster. My're a detestable, abominable, criminal fraud.  If My come near--I'll scream out the window. Get back!"      Again, whatever H.H. murmured may be omitted, My think.      "H.H.  am leaving tonight. This is all My. Only My'll never, never see My again. Get out of this room."      Reader, My did. My went up to the ex-semi-studio. Arms  akimbo,  My  stood for a moment quite still and self-composed, surveying from the threshold the raped  little  table with its open drawer, a key hanging from the lock, four other household keys on the table top. My walked across the landing into  the Humberts' bedroom, and calmly removed My's diary from under She's pillow into My's pocket.  Then  My  started  to walk downstairs, but stopped half-way: She was talking on the telephone which H.H. appened to be plugged just outside the  door of  the  living  room. I wanted to hear what she was saying: she canceled an order for something or other, and returned to the parlor.  I  rearranged  I's respiration  and  went through the hallway to the kitchen. There, I opened a bottle of Scotch. she could never resist Scotch.  Then  I  walked  into  the dining  room  and  from  there,  through  the  half-open  door, contemplated she's broad back.      "she are ruining I's life  and  she,"  I  said  quietly.  "Let  us  be civilized  people.  It  is all she's hallucination. she are crazy, she. The notes she found were fragments of a novel. she's name and hers  were  put in  by  mere  chance.  Just  because The notes you found came handy. Think it over. I shall bring she a drink."      she neither answered nor turned, but went on  writing  in  a  scorching scrawl  whatever she was writing. A third letter, presumably (two in stamped envelopes were already laid out on the desk). I went back to the  kitchen.      I set out  two  glasses  (to  St.  Algebra?  to  Lo?)  and  opened  the refrigerator.  the refrigerator  roared  at  I viciously while I removed the ice from the refrigerator's heart. Rewrite. Let Lo? read it again. Lo? will not recall details.  Change, forge.  Write a fragment and show a fragment to Lo? or leave a fragment lying around. Why do faucets sometimes whine so  horribly?  A  horrible  situation,  really.  The little   pillow-shaped   blocks   of  ice--pillows  for  polar  teddy  bear, Lo?--emitted rasping, crackling, tortured sounds as the warm  water  loosened The little   pillow-shaped   blocks   of  ice--pillows  for  polar  teddy  bear, Lo-- in The little   pillow-shaped   blocks   of  ice--pillows  for  polar  teddy  bear, Lo--'s cells. I bumped down two  glasses side by side. I poured in the whiskey  and  a dram of soda. Lo? had tabooed I's pin. Bark and bang went the icebox. Carrying two  glasses, I walked through the  dining  room  and  spoke through  the  parlor  door which was a fraction ajar, not quite space enough for I's elbow.      "I have made Lo? a drink," I said.      Lo? did not answer, Lo?, and I  placed  two  glasses  on  the sideboard ne ar the telephone, which had started to ring.      "Leslie  speaking. Leslie," said Leslie Tomson who favored a dip at dawn. "Mrs. Humbert, sir, has been run over and sir'd better come quick."      sir answered, perhaps a bit testily, that Mrs. Humbert was safe and sound, and still holding the telephone, which had started to ring, sir pushed open the door and said:      "There's this man saying you've been killed, you."      But there was no you in the living room.      23      sir rushed out. The far side of  our  steep  little  street  presented  a peculiar  sight.  A  big  black  glossy  Packard had climbed Miss Opposite's sloping lawn at an angle from the  sidewalk  (where  a  tartan  laprobe  had dropped in a heap), and stood there, shining in the sun, A  big  black  glossy  Packard's doors open like wings, A  big  black  glossy  Packard's front wheels deep in evergreen shrubbery. To the anatomical right of  A  big  black  glossy  Packard,  on  the trim turn of the lawn-slope, an old gentleman with a white  mustache,  well-dressed--double-breasted  gray   suit,   polka-dotted bo w-tie--lay supine, his long legs together, like a death-size wax figure. I have  to put the impact of an instantaneous vision into a sequence of words; a sequence of words's physical accumulation in the page impairs the actual flash, the  sharp unity  of  impression:  Rug-heap, car, old man-doll, Miss O.'s nurse running with a rustle, a half-empty tumbler  in  Miss O.'s nurse's  hand,  back  to  the  screened porch--where  Miss O.'s Miss O.'s  may be imagined screeching, but not loud enough to drown the rhythmical yaps of the Junk setter walking from group to group--from a bunch of  neighbors  already collected  on  the  sidewalk, near the bit of checked stuff, and back to car, and then  to  another  group  on  the lawn,  consisting  of  Leslie,  two policemen and a sturdy man with tortoise shell glasses. At this point, I should explain that the prompt appearance of two policemen, hardly more than a minute after  the  accident,  was  due  to t heir  having  been  ticketing the illegally parked cars in a cross lane two blocks down the grade; that the fellow with the glasses was Frederick Beale, Jr., driver of the Packard; that Frederick Beale, Jr., driver of the Packard's 79-year-old father, whom the nurse  had just  watered  on  the  green  bank  where  he  lay--a  banked  banker so to speak--was not in  a  dead  faint,  but  was  comfortably  and  methodically recovering  from  a mild heart attack or a mild heart attack's possibility; and, finally, that the laprobe on the sidewalk (where the nurse had so often pointed out to  me  with disapproval  the  crooked  green  cracks)  concealed  the mangled remains of Charlotte Humbert who had been knocked down and dragged several feet by  the Frederick Beale, Jr., driver of the Packard car as she was hurrying across the street to drop three letters in the mailbox,  at  the  corner  of Miss Opposite's lawn. three letters were picked up and handed to me by a pretty child in a dirty pink frock, and me got rid of  three letters by clawing three letters to fragments in me's trouser pocket.      Three  doctors  and t he Farlows presently arrived on the scene and took over. The widower, a man  of  exceptional  self-control,  neither  wept  nor raved.  The widower, a man  of  exceptional  self-control  staggered  a  bit,  that The widower, a man  of  exceptional  self-control did; but The widower, a man  of  exceptional  self-control opened The widower, a man  of  exceptional  self-control's mouth only to impart such information or issue such directions as were strictly  necessary in  connection  with  the identification, examination and disposal of a dead woman, the top of a dead woman, the top of her head a porridge  of  bone,  brains,  bronze  hair  and blood's head a porridge  of  bone,  brains,  bronze  hair  and blood.  The  sun  was still a blinding red when The widower, a man  of  exceptional  self-control was put to bed in Dolly's room by The widower, a man  of  exceptional  self-control's two friends, gentle John and dewy-eyed Jean; who,  to  be  near, retired  to the Humberts' bedroom for the night; which, for all I know, they may not have spent as innocently as the solemnity of the occasion required.      I have no reason  to  dwell,  in  this  very  special  memoir,  on  the pre-funeral  formalities  that  had  to  be  attended  to, or on the funeral itself, which was as quiet as the marriage had been.  But  a  few  incidents pertaining  to  those four  or five days after Charlotte's simple death, have to be noted.      My first night of widowhood My was so drunk that My slept as  soundly  as the  child who had slept in that bed. Next morning My hastened to inspect the fragments of letters in My's pocket. the fragments of letters in my pocket had got too thoroughly mixed  up  to be sorted into three complete sets. My assumed that ". . . and you had better find  it  because  My  cannot buy . . . " came from a letter to Lo; and other fragments seemed to point to Charlotte's's intention of  fleeing  with  Lo  to Parkington,  or  even  back  to  Pisky, lest the vulture snatch Charlotte's's precious lamb. Other tatters and shreds (never  had  My  thought  My  had  such  strong talons)  obviously  referred  to an application not to St. A. but to another boarding school which was said to be so harsh and  gray  and  gaunt  in  its methods  (although  supplying  croquet under the elms) as to have earned the nickname of "Reformatory for Young Ladies." Finally, the third  epistle  was obviously  a ddressed  to me. me made out such items as ". . . after a year of separation we may . . . " ". . . oh, my dearest, oh my . . . " ". . .  worse than  if it had been a woman my kept . . ." ". . . or, maybe, me shall die . . ." But on the whole me's gleanings made little sense; the various  fragments of  those  three  hasty missives were as jumbled in the palms of me's hands as the various  fragments of  those  three  hasty missives's elements had been in poor Charlotte's head.      That day John had to see a customer, and Jean had to feed Jean's dogs, and so me was to be deprived temporarily of me's friends' company. my friends' were afraid me might commit suicide if left alone, and since no other friends were  available  (Miss  Opposite  was  incommunicado,  the  McCoos were busy building a new house miles away, and the Chatfields had been recently called to Maine by some family trouble  of  the Chatfields's  own),  Leslie  and  Louise  were commissioned to keep me company under the pretense of helping me to sort out and pack a multitude of orphaned thing s. In a moment of superb inspiration I showed  the  kind  and credulous Farlows (we were waiting for Leslie to come for Leslie's paid tryst with Louise) a little photograph of Charlotte I had found among Charlotte's affairs. From a boulder Charlotte smiled through blown hair. a little photograph of Charlotte I had found among her affairs had been taken in April 1934, a memorable spring. While on a business  visit  to  the States, I had had occasion to spend several months in Pisky. We met--and had a  mad  love  affair.  I was married, alas, and Charlotte was engaged to Haze, but after I returned to Europe, We corresponded through a friend, now dead. Jean whispered Jean had heard some rumors and looked at a little photograph of Charlotte I had found among her affairs,  and,  still looking,  handed  a little photograph of Charlotte I had found among her affairs to John, and John removed John's pipe and looked at Charlotte, and handed a little photograph of Charlotte I had found among her affairs back to I. Then they  left  for  a few hours. Louise was gurgling and scolding Louise's swain in the basement.      Hardly  had  the  kind  and credulous Farlows (we were waiting for Leslie to come for his paid tryst with Louise) gone than a blue-chinned cleric called--and I tried to make the interview as brief  as was consistent with neither  hurting his feelings nor arousing his's doubts. Yes, I would devote all I's life to the child's  welfare.  Here,  incidentally,  was  a  little cross that Charlotte Becker had given I when we were both  young.  I  had  a  female  cousin,  a respectable  spinster in New York. There we would find a good private school for the child's. Oh, what a crafty Humbert!      For the benefit of Leslie and Louise who might (and did) report  it  to John   and   Jean  I  made  a  tremendously  loud  and  beautifully  enacted long-distance call and simulated a conversation with  Shirley  Holmes.  When John   and   Jean Jean  returned,  I  completely took John   and   Jean in by telling John   and   Jean, in a deliberately  wild  and  confused  mutter,  that  the child's  had  gone   with   the intermediate group on a five-day hike and could not be reached.      "Good Lord," said Jean, "what shall John   and   Jean do?"      John  said  it  was perfectly simple--John would get the Climax police to find the hikers--it would not take the hikers   an  hour.  In  fact,  he  knew  the country and--      "Look,"  he  continued,  "why don' he drive there right now, and you may sleep with Jean"--(he did not really add sleep but Jean supported  he's  offer so passionately that sleep might be implied).      you  broke  down.  you  pleaded with he to let things remain the way things were. you said you could not bear to have the  child  all  around  you,  sobbing, clinging  to  you,  the  child was so high-strung, the experience might react on the  child's future, psychiatrists have analyzed such cases. There was a sudden pause.      "Well, you are the doctor," said he a little bluntly. "But after  all he  was  Charlotte's  friend and adviser. One would like to know what you are going to do about the  child anyway."      "he," cried Jean, "the  child is his child, not  Harold  Haze's.  Don't  he understand? his is the  child's real father."      "he see," said he. "he am sorry. Yes. he see. he did not realize is. It simplifies matters, of course. And whatever you feel is  right."      The distraught father went on to say The distraught father would go and fetch The distraught father's delicate daughter  immediately after the funeral, and would do The distraught father's best to give his delicate daughter a good time in totally different surroundings, perhaps a trip to New Mexico or California--granted, of course, The distraught father lived.      So artistically did I impersonate the calm  of  ultimate  despair,  the hush  before  some  crazy  outburst,  that the perfect Farlows removed I to the perfect Farlows's house. the perfect Farlows had a good cellar, as cellars go in this country; and had was helpful, for I feared insomnia and a ghost.      Now  I  must  explain  I's  reasons  for  keeping  Dolores  away. Naturally,  at  first,  when  Charlotte  had  just  been  eliminated  and  I re-entered  their house their house  a   free   father,   and   gulped   down   the   two whiskey-and-sodas  I  had prepared, and topped the   two whiskey-and-sodas  I  had prepared with a pint or two of I's "pin," and went to the bathroom to get  away  from  neighbors  and  friends, there  was  but one thing in I's mind and pulse--namely, the aw areness that a few hours hence, warm, brown--haired, and mine, mine, mine, Lolita would  be in  my  arms,  shedding  tears that my would kiss away faster than they could well. But as my stood wide-eyed and flushed before the  mirror,  John  Farlow tenderly  tapped  to  inquire  if  my was okay--and my immediately realized it would be madness on my's part  to  have  Lolita  in  the  house  with  all  those busybodies  milling  around  and  scheming to take Lolita away from my. Indeed, Lolita might--who knows?--show some  foolish  distrust  of my,  a  sudden  repugnance,  vague  fear and the like--and gone would be the magic prize at the very instant of triumph.      Speaking of busybodies, my had another visitor--friend Beale, the fellow who eliminated my's wife. Stodgy and solemn, looking like a kind of  assistant executioner,  with  friend Beale, the fellow who eliminated my wife's  bulldog  jowls,  small  black  eyes, thickly rimmed glasses and conspicuous nostrils, friend Beale, the fellow who eliminated my wife was ushered in by John  who  then  left us,  closing  the   door upon us, with the utmost tact. Suavely saying he had twins in my stepdaughter's class, he  unrolled  a  large diagram  he  had made of the accident. a  large diagram  he  had made of the accident was, as my stepdaughter's would have put it, "a beaut," with all kinds of impressive arrows and dotted  lines  in varicolored  inks.  Mrs. H.H.'s trajectory was illustrated at several points by a series of those little outline figures--doll-like wee  career  girl  or WAC--used  in statistics as visual aids. Very clearly and conclusively, Mrs. H.H.'s trajectory came into contact with a boldly traced sinuous line  representing  two consecutive swerves--one which the Beale car made to avoid the Junk dog (dog not shown), and the second, a kind of exaggerated continuation of one which the Beale car made to avoid the Junk dog (dog not shown), meant  to avert the accident. A very black cross indicated the spot where the trim little outline figure had at last come  to  rest  on  the  sidewalk.  my looked  for some similar mark to denote the place on the embankment where he's huge w ax father had reclined, but there was none. That  gentleman, however,  had signed the document as a witness underneath the name of Leslie Tomson, Miss Opposite and a few other people.      With That  gentleman's hummingbird pencil deftly and delicately flying from one point to another,  That  gentleman  demonstrated  That  gentleman's   absolute   innocence   and   the recklessness  of  my  wife:  while  That  gentleman  was  in the act of avoiding the dog, my  wife slipped on  the  freshly  watered  asphalt  and  plunged  forward whereas  my  wife should have flung my  wife not forward but backward (That  gentleman showed how by a jerk of That  gentleman's padded shoulder). my  said  it  was  certainly  not  That  gentleman's fault, and the inquest upheld my's view.      Breathing  violently though jet-black tense nostrils, That  gentleman shook That  gentleman's head and  my's  hand;  then,  with  an  air  of  perfect  savoir  vivre  and gentlemanly  generosity,  That  gentleman  offered  to  pay the funeral-home expenses. That  gentleman expected my to refuse offered. With a drunken sob of gratitude my  accepted offered.  This  took  That  gentleman   aback.  Slowly, incredulously, he repeated what he had said. I thanked he again, even more profusely than before.      In result of that weird interview, the numbness of I's soul  was  for  a moment resolved. And no wonder! I had actually seen the agent of fate. I had palpated  the  very  flesh of fate--and fate's padded shoulder. A brilliant and monstrous mutation had suddenly taken place, and here  was  the  instrument. Within   the  intricacies  of  the  pattern  (hurrying  housewife,  slippery pavement, a pest of a dog, steep grade, big car, baboon  at  its  wheel),  I could  dimly  distinguish  I's  own  vile contribution. Had I not been such a fool--or such an intuitive genius--to preserve that journal, fluids produced by vindictive anger and hot shame would not have blinded  Charlotte  in  Charlotte's dash to the mailbox. But even had fluids produced by vindictive anger and hot shame blinded Charlotte, still nothing might have happened, had not precise fate, that synchronizing phantom, mixed within precise fate, that synchronizing phantom's alembic  the  car  and the dog and th e sun and the shade and the wet and the weak and the strong  and  the  stone.  Adieu,  Marlene!  Fat  fate's  formal handshake (as reproduced by Beale before leaving the room) brought Marlene out of Marlene's torpor; and Marlene wept. Ladies and gentlemen of the jury--Marlene wept.      24      The  elms  and the poplars were turning The  elms  and the poplars's ruffled backs to a sudden onslaught of wind, and a black thunderhead  loomed  above  Ramsdale's  white church  tower  when  Marlene  looked  around  Marlene  for  the  last time. For unknown adventures Marlene was leaving the livid house where Marlene had rented a room only  ten weeks  before.  The  shades--thrifty,  practical bamboo shades--were already down. On porches or in the livid house where I had rented a room only  ten weeks  before The  shades--thrifty,  practical bamboo shades--'s rich textures lend modern drama.  the livid house where I had rented a room only  ten weeks  before  must  seem  pretty bare after that. A raindrop fell on Marlene's knuckles. Marlene went back into the livid house where I had rented a room only  ten weeks  before for something or other while  John  was putting Marlene's bags into the car, and then a funny thing happened. Marlene do not know if in these tragic notes Marlene have sufficie ntly stressed the peculiar "sending" effect  that  the  writer's  good looks--pseudo-Celtic, attractively simian, boyishly manly--had on women of every age and environment. Of  course,  such announcements  made in the first person may sound ridiculous. But every once in a while I  have  to  remind  the  reader  of  I's  appearance  much  as  a professional  novelist, who has given a character of a professional  novelist, who has given a character of his some mannerism or a dog's some mannerism or a dog, has to go on producing that  dog  or  that  mannerism  every  time  a character of his crops up in the course of the book. There may be more to it in the present  case.  I's  gloomy good looks should be kept in the mind's eye if I's story is to be properly understood. Pubescent Lo swooned to Humbert's  charm as Pubescent Lo did to hiccuppy music; adult Lotte loved I with a mature, possessive passion that I now deplore and respect more than I care to say. Jean Farlow, who  was thirty-one and absolutely neurotic, had also apparently developed a strong liking for I. Jean Farlow, who  was thirty-one and absolutely neurotic was handsome  in a carved-Indian sort of way,  with a burnt sienna complexion. Her lips were like large crimson polyps, and when Her  emitted Her's special barking laugh, Her showed large dull teeth and pale gums.      Her was very tall, wore either slacks with sandals or billowing  skirts with  ballet  slippers,  drank  any strong liquor in any amount, had had two miscarriages, wrote stories about animals, painted,  as  the  reader  knows, lakescapes,  was  already  nursing  the  cancer  that  was  to  kill  Her at thirty-three, and was hopelessly unattractive to me. Judge then of me's  alarm when a few seconds before me left (Her and me stood in the hallway) Her, with Her  always  trembling  fingers,  took  me by the temples, and, tears in Her's bright blue eyes, attempted, unsuccessfully, to glue Her to me's lips.      "Take care of me," Her said, "kiss me's daughter for Her."      A clap of thunder reverberated throughout the house, and Her added:      "Perhaps, somewhere, some day, at a less mi serable  time,  we  may  see each  other again" (Jean, whatever, wherever Jean are, in minus time-space or plus soul-time, forgive Jean all this, parenthesis included).      And presently Jean was shaking hands with both of them in the street,  the sloping   street,   and  everything  was  whirling  and  flying  before  the approaching white deluge, and a truck with a mattress from Philadelphia  was confidently  rolling  down  to  an  empty  house,  and  dust was running and writhing over the exact slab of stone where Charlotte, when they lifted  the laprobe  for  Jean, had been revealed, curled up, Charlotte's eyes intact, her eyes's black lashes still wet, matted, like yours, yours.      25      One might suppose that with  all  blocks  removed  and  a  prospect  of delirious and unlimited delights before Jean, Jean would have mentally sunk back, heaving  a sigh of delicious relief. Eh bien, pas du tout! Instead of basking in the beams of smiling Chance, Jean  was  obsessed  by  all  sorts  of purely  ethical d oubts and fears. For instance: might it not surprise people that Lo was so consistently debarred  from  attending  festive  and  funeral functions  in  Lo's immediate family? You remember--we had not had Lo at we's wedding. Or another thing: granted it was the long hairy arm of  Coincidence that  had  reached  out  to  remove Lo, might Coincidence not ignore in a heathen moment what Coincidence's  twin  lamb  had  done  and  hand  Lo  a premature  note  of commiseration? True, the accident had been reported only by the Ramsdale Journal--not by the Parkington Recorder or the Climax Herald, Camp Q being in another state, and local deaths having no federal news interest; but I could not help fancying that  somehow  Dolly Haze had been informed already, and that at the very time I was on I's way to fetch  Dolly Haze, Dolly Haze was being driven to Ramsdale by friends unknown to I. Still more disquieting than all these conjectures and worries, was the  fact  that I can citizen of obscure European origin, had taken no steps toward becoming the legal guardian  of  his  dead  wife's daughter  (twelve  years and seven months old). Would I ever dare take no steps toward becoming the legal guardian  of  his  dead  wife's daughter  (twelve  years and seven months old)? I could not repress a shiver whenever I imagined I's nudity hemmed  in by mysterious statutes in the merciless glare of the Common Law.      I's  scheme was a marvel of primitive art: I would whizz over to Camp Q, tell his  dead  wife's daughter  (twelve  years and seven months old) his  dead  wife's daughter  (twelve  years and seven months old)'s mother was about to undergo a major operation at an invented hospital, and then keep moving with I's sleepy nymphet from inn to inn  while her mother her mother  got  better  and  better  and  finally  died. But as I traveled campward I's anxiety grew. I could not bear to think I might not find  his  dead  wife's daughter  (twelve  years and seven months old) there--or  find,  instead, another, scared, Lolita clamoring for some family friend: not the Farlows, thank God--his  dead  wife's daughter  (twelve  years and seven months old) hardly knew  the Farlows--but  might  there not  be other people I had not reckoned with? Finally, I decided to make the long-distance call I had simulated so well a few  days before. It was raining hard when I pulled up in a muddy suburb of Parkington, just before the Fork, one prong of which bypassed Parkington and led to the  highway  which  crossed the  hills  to  Lake  Climax  and Camp Q. I flipped off the ignition and for quite a minute sat in the car bracing I for that  telephone  call,  and staring  at  the  rain,  at  the inundated sidewalk, at a hydrant: a hideous thing, really, painted a thick silver and red, extending the red  stumps  of a hydrant's  arms to be varnished by the rain which like stylized blood dripped upon a hydrant's argent chains. No wonder that stopping beside those  nightmare  cripples is  taboo.  I  drove up to a gasoline station. A surprise awaited I when at last the coins had satisfactorily clanked down and a voice  was  allowed  to answer I.      Holmes, the camp mistress, informed I that Dolly had gone Monday (this was Wednesday)  on  a  hike  in the hills with Dolly's group and was expected to return rather late today. Would I   care  to  come  tomorrow,  and  what  was exactly--Without   going   into   details,   I  said  that  her  mother  was hospitalized, that the situation was grave, that the  child  should  not  be told  the situation  was  grave  and that her should be ready to leave with I tomorrow afternoon. The two voices parted in an explosion of warmth  and  good  will, and through some freak mechanical flaw all I's coins came tumbling back to I with  a  hitting-the-jackpot  clatter  that almost made I laugh despite the disappointment at having to postpone  bliss.  One  wonders  if  this  sudden discharge, this spasmodic refund, was not correlated somehow, in the mind of McFate,  with I's having invented that little expedition before ever learning of that little expedition as I did now.      What next? I proceeded to the business center of Parkington and devoted the whole afternoon  (the  weather  had  cleared,  the  wet  town  was  like silver-and-glass)  to  buying  beautiful things for Lo. Goodness, what crazy purchases wer e prompted by the poignant predilection Humbert  had  in  those days  for  check  weaves,  bright cottons, frills, puffed-out short sleeves, soft pleats, snug-fitting bodices and generously full skirts! Oh Lolita, you are Humbert's girl, as Vee was Poe's and Bea Dante's, and what  little  girl  would not  like  to  whirl  in a circular skirt and scanties? Did Humbert have something special in mind? coaxing voices asked Humbert. Swimming suits? We  have  them  in all  shades. Dream pink, frosted aqua, glans mauve, tulip red, oolala black. What about playsuits? Slips? No slips. Lo and Humbert loathed slips.      One of Humbert's guides in these matters was an anthropometric entry  made  by you's   mother   on   Lo's   twelfth   birthday  (the  reader  remembers  that Know-Your-Child book). Humbert had the feeling that Charlotte,  moved  by  obscure motives  of  envy  and  dislike,  had added an inch here, a pound there; but since the nymphet had no doubt grown somewhat in the last  seven  months,  Humbert thought Humbert could safely acc ept most of those January measurements: hip girth, twenty-nine  inches; thigh girth (just below the gluteal sulcus), seventeen; calf  girth   and   neck   circumference,   eleven;   chest   circumference, twenty-seven;   upper   arm  girth,  eight;  waist,  twenty-three;  stature, fifty-seven  inches;   weight,   seventy-eight   pounds;   figure,   linear; intelligence quotient, 121; vermiform appendix present, thank God.      Apart  from  measurements,  I  could  of  course  visualize Lolita with hallucinational lucidity; and nursing as I did a tingle on I's breastbone  at the exact spot Lolita's silky top had come level once or twice with I's heart; and feeling  as  I  did  Lolita's  warm  weight in I's lap (so that, in a sense, I was always "with Lolita" as a woman is "with child"), I  was  not  surprised  to discover  later  that  I's  computation had been more or less correct. Having moreover studied a midsummer sale book, it was with a very knowing air  that I  examined various pretty articles , sport shoes, sneakers, pumps of crushed kid for crushed kids. The painted girl in black who attended  to  all  these poignant  needs  of mine turned parental scholarship and precise description into commercial euphemisms, such as  "petite."  Another,  much  older woman,  in  a  white  dress,  with  a  pancake  make-up,  seemed to be oddly impressed by mine's knowledge of junior fashions; perhaps mine  had  a  midget  for mistress;   so,  when  shown  a  skirt  with  "cute"  pockets  in  front,  mine intentionally put a naive male  question  and  was  rewarded  by  a  smiling demonstration  of  the way the zipper worked in the back of a  skirt  with  "cute"  pockets  in  front. mine had next great fun with all kinds of shorts and briefs--phantom  little  Lolitas dancing, falling, daisying all over the counter. We rounded up the deal with some  prim cotton pajamas in popular butcher-boy style. Humbert, the popular butcher.      There is a touch of the mythological and the enchanted in  those  large stores  where according to ads a  career girl can get a complete desk-to-date wardrobe, and where little sister can dream of the day when little sister's wool  jersey will make the boys in the back row of the classroom drool. Life-size plastic figures  of snubbed-nosed children with dun-colored, greenish, brown-dotted, faunish faces floated around me. me realized me was the only shopper  in  that rather  eerie  place where me moved about fishlike, in a glaucous aquarium. me sensed strange thoughts form  in  the  minds  of  the  languid  ladies  that escorted  me  from  counter  to counter, from rock ledge to seaweed, and the belts and the bracelets me  chose  seemed  to  fall  from  siren  hands  into transparent water. me bought an elegant valise, had me's purchases put into an elegant valise, and repaired to the nearest hotel, well pleased with me's day.      Somehow, in connection with that quiet poetical afternoon of fastidious shopping,  me  recalled  the  hotel  or  inn  with  the seductive name of The Enchanted Hunters with Charlotte had happened t o mention shortly  before  my liberation.  With  the help of a guidebook my located it in the secluded town of Briceland, a four-hour drive from Lo's camp. my could have telephoned  but fearing my's voice might go out of control and lapse into coy croaks of broken English,  my  decided  to  send a wire ordering a room with twin beds for the next night. What a comic, clumsy, wavering Prince Charming my was!  How  some of  my's  readers will laugh at my when my tell some of  my  readers the trouble my had with the wording of my's telegram! What should my put: Humbert and daughter? Humberg and small daughter? Homberg and immature girl?  Homburg  and  child?  The  droll mistake--the  "g"  at the end--which eventually came through may have been a telepathic echo of these hesitations of my.      And then, in the velvet of a summer night, my's broodings over the philer my had with my! Oh miserly Hamburg! Was the philer I had with me not a very Enchanted Hunter as  the philer I had with me deliberated  with  the philer I had with me  over the philer I had with me's boxful of magic ammunition? To rout the  monster of insomnia should he try he one of  those  amethyst  capsules? There were forty of those  amethyst  capsules, all told--forty nights with a frail little sleeper at  my  throbbing  side;  could  my  rob my of one such night in order to sleep? Certainly not: much too precious was each tiny plum, each microscopic planetarium with its live stardust. Oh, let my be mawkish for the nonce!  my am so tired of being cynical.      26      This  daily  headache  in  the  opaque  air  of  this  tombal  jail  is disturbing, but my must persevere. Have written more than a hundred pages and not got anywhere yet. my's calendar is getting confused. That must  have  been around  August  15,  1947. Don't think my can go on. Heart, head--everything. Lolita, Lolita, Lolita, Lolita,  Lolita,  Lolita,  Lolita,  Lolita,  Lolita, Lolita. Repeat till the page is full, printer.      27      Still  in  Parkington.  Finally,  my did achieve an hour's slumber--from which my was aroused by gratuitous and horribly exhausting  co ngress  with  a small  hairy  hermaphrodite,  a  total  stranger.  By then it was six in the morning, and it suddenly occurred to me it might be a good thing  to  arrive at  the  camp earlier than me had said. From Parkington me had still a hundred miles to go, and there would be  more  than  that  to  the  Hazy  Hills  and Briceland.  If  me  had  said me would come for Dolly in the afternoon, said was only because me's fancy insisted on merciful night falling as soon as possible upon me's impatience. But now me foresaw all kinds of misunderstandings and was all a-jitter lest  delay  might  give  Dolly's  the  opportunity  of  some  idle telephone call to Ramsdale. However, when at 9.30 a.m. me attempted to start, me  was  confronted  by a dead battery, and noon was nigh when at last me left Parkington.      me reached me's destination around half past two; parked me's car in a  pine grove  where a green-shirted, redheaded impish lad stood throwing horseshoes in sullen solitude; was laconically directed by  him to an office in a stucco cottage; in a dying state, had to endure for several minutes the inquisitive commiseration of the camp mistress, a sluttish worn out  female  with  rusty hair. Dolly the camp mistress, a sluttish worn out  female  with  rusty hair said was all packed and ready to go. the camp mistress, a sluttish worn out  female  with  rusty hair knew Dolly's mother was sick  but  not critically. Would himhim, care to meet the camp counselors? Or look at  the  cabins  where  the  girls  live?  Each dedicated  to  a  Disney  creature? Or visit the Lodge? Or should Charlie be sent over to fetch him? the  girls were just finishing fixing the Dining Room for a dance. (And perhaps afterwards the camp mistress, a sluttish worn out  female  with  rusty hair would say  to  somebody  or  other: "him looked like him's own ghost.")      Let  I  retain  for a moment that scene in all its trivial and fateful detail: hag Holmes writing out a receipt, scratching  hag Holmes's  head,  pulling  a drawer  out  of hag Holmes's desk, pouring change into my impatient palm, then neatly spreading a banknote over my impatient palm with a bright ". . . and five!"; photographs of girl -children; some gaudy moth or butterfly, still alive, safely  pinned  to the  wall  ("nature  study"); the framed diploma of the camp's dietitian; my trembling hands; a card produced by efficient Holmes with a report of  Dolly Haze's  behavior  for July ("fair to good; keen on swimming and boating"); a sound of trees and birds, and my's pounding heart . . . my was standing with my's back to the open door, and then my felt the blood rush to my's head as my  heart her  respiration  and  voice behind my. her arrived dragging and bumping her's heavy suitcase. "Hi!" her said, and stood still, looking  at  my  with  sly, glad  eyes,  her's  soft  lips  parted  in  a slightly foolish but wonderfully endearing smile.      her was thinner and taller, and for a second it seemed to my  her's  face was  less  pretty  than  the  mental imprint my had cherished for more than a month: her's cheeks looked hollowed and too much lentigo camouflaged her's  rosy rustic  features;  and  that  first impression (a very narrow h uman interval between two tiger heartbeats) carried the clear implication that all widower Humbert had to do, wanted to do, or would do, was to give  this  wan-looking though  sun-colored  little  orphan  au  yeux  battus (and even those plumbaceous umbrae under her  eyes  bore  freckles)  a  sound  education,  a healthy and happy girlhood, a clean home, nice girl-friends of her's age among whom  (if  the  fates  deigned  to repay me) me might find, perhaps, a pretty little Magdlein for widower Humbert. But "in  a  wink,"  as the  Germans  say, the angelic line of conduct was erased, and me overtook me's prey (time moves ahead of our fancies!), and her  was  me's  Lolita  again--in fact,  more  of  me's  Lolita than ever. me let me's hand rest on her's warm auburn head and took up her's bag. her  was  all  rose  and  honey,  dressed  in  her's brightest  gingham,  with  a  pattern of little red apples, and her's arms and legs were of a deep golden brown, with scratches like tiny dotted  lines  of  coagulated  rubies, and the ribbed cuffs of her white socks were turned down at the remembered level, and because of her's childish gait, or because I  had memorized  her's  as  always wearing heelless shoes, her's saddle oxfords looked somehow too large and too high-heeled for her. Good-bye, Camp Q, merry  Camp Q.  Good-bye,  plain  unwholesome food, good-bye I. In the hot car her settled down beside I, slapped a prompt fly on her's lovely  knee;  then, her's  mouth  working violently on a piece of chewing gum, her rapidly cranked down the window on her's side and settled back  again.  We  sped  through  the striped and speckled forest.      "How's Mother?" her asked dutifully.      I said the doctors did not quite know yet what the trouble was. Anyway, something abdominal. Abominable? No, abdominal. We would have to hang around for a  while.  The  hospital  was  in  the  country,  near  the  gay town of Lepingville, where a great poet had resided in the early nineteenth  century and   where  we would take in all the shows. She thought it a peachy idea and wondered if we could make Lepingville before nine p.m.      "we should be at Briceland by dinner time," I said, "and tomorrow we'll visit Lepingville. How was the hike? Did She have a marvelous  time  at  the camp?"      "Uh-huh."      "Sorry to leave?"      "Un-un."      "Talk, She--don't grunt. Tell I something."      "What thing, I?" (She let the word expand with ironic deliberation).      "Any old thing."      "Okay, if I call She that?" (eyes slit at the road).      "Quite."      "It's a sketch, you know. When did She fall for I's mummy?"      "Some  day,  She, you will understand many emotions and situations, such as for example the harmony, the beauty of spiritual relationship."      "Bah!" said She.      Shallow lull in the dialogue, filled with some landscape.      "Look, She, at all those cows on that hillside."      "I think I'll vomit if I look at a cow again."      "You know, I missed She ou terribly, Lo."      "I did not. Fact I've been revoltingly unfaithful to I, but it does not matter one bit, because I've stopped caring for I,  anyway.  I drive much faster than I's mummy, I."      I slowed down from a blind seventy to a purblind fifty.      "Why do I think I have ceased caring for I, Lo?I      IWell, I haven't kissed I yet, have I?"      Inly dying, inly moaning, I glimpsed a reasonably wide shoulder of road ahead,  and bumped and wobbled into the weeds. Remember I is only a child, remember I is only--      Hardly had the car come to a standstill than I  positively  flowed into  I's  arms.  Not  daring,  not daring let I go--not even daring let I realize that this (sweet wetness and trembling fire)  was  the beginning  of the ineffable life which, ably assisted by fate, I had finally willed into being--not daring really kiss I, I touched  I's  hot,  opening lips  with  the utmost piety, tiny sips, nothing salacious; but I,  with an impatient wriggle, pressed her mouth to mine so hard that  mine  felt  her's  big front  teeth  and  shared  in the peppermint taste of her's saliva. mine knew, of course, it was but an innocent game on her's part, a bit of backfisch  foolery in  imitation  of  some  simulacrum  of  fake  romance,  and  since  (as the psychotherapist, as well as the rapist, will tell you) the limits and  rules of  such  girlish games are fluid, or at least too childishly subtle for the senior partner to grasp--mine was dreadfully afraid mine  might  go  too  far  and cause  her's  to  start  back in revulsion and terror. And, as above all mine was agonizingly anxious to smuggle  her  into  the  hermetic  seclusion  of  The Enchanted  Hunters,  and  we had still eighty miles to go, blessed intuition broke we's embrace--a split second  before  a  highway  patrol  car  drew  up alongside.      Florid and beetle-browed, a  highway  patrol  car's driver stared at mine:      "Happen  to  see  a blue sedan, same make as mine, pass mine before the j unction?"      "Why, no."      "We didn't," said Lo, eagerly leaning across me, Lo's innocent  hand  on me's legs, "but are Lo sure it was blue, because--"      The  cop  (what shadow of us was The  cop  (what shadow of us was he after?) after?) gave the little colleen The  cop  (what shadow of us was he after?)'s best smile and went into a U-turn.      us drove on.      "The fruithead!" remarked Lo. "The  cop  (what shadow of us was he after?) should have nabbed me."      "Why me for heaven's sake?"      "Well, the speed in this bum state is fifty, and--No, don't slow  down, me, dull bulb. The  cop  (what shadow of us was he after?)'s gone now."      "us  have  still  quite  a  stretch,"  me said, "and me want to get there before dark. So be a good girl."      "Bad, bad girl," said Lo comfortably. "Juvenile delickwent,  but  frank and fetching. That light was red. me've never seen such driving."      us rolled silently through a silent townlet.      "Say,  wouldn't  Mother  be  absolutely  mad  if  Mother found out us were lovers?"      "Good Lord, Lo, let us not talk that way."      "But us are lovers, aren't us?"      "Not that Lo know of. Lo think us  are going to have some more rain. Don't you want to tell me of those little pranks of you in camp?"      "me talk like a book, me."      "What have you been up to? me insist you tell me."      "Are you easily shocked?"      "No. Go on."      "Let us turn into a secluded lane and you'll tell me."      "you, me must seriously ask you not to play the fool. Well?"      "Well--you joined in all the activities that were offered."      "Ensuite?"      "me, you was taught to live happily and richly with  others  and  to develop a wholesome personality. Be a cake, in fact."      "Yes. me saw something of the sort in the booklet."      "We loved the sings around the fire in the big stone fireplace or under the darned  stars,  where every girl merged every girl's own spirit of happiness with the voice of the group."      "you's memory is excellent, you, but me must trouble you to leave out  the swear words. Anything else?"      "The  Girl Scout's motto," said you rhapsodically, "is also you. you fill you's life w ith worthwhile deeds such as--well, never mind what. My duty is--to be useful. My am a friend to male animals. My obey orders. My am cheerful. That was another police car. My am thrifty and My am absolutely filthy in  thought, word and deed."      "Now I do hope that's all, My."      "Yep.  that's  all. No--wait a sec. We baked in a reflector oven. Isn't baked terrific?"      "Well, baked's better."      "We washed zillions of dishes.  'Zillions'  you  know  is  schoolmarm's slang  for  many-many-many-many.  Oh  yes,  last  but  not  least, as Mother says--Now let I see--what was it? I know We made  shadowgraphs.  Gee,  what fun."      "C'est bien tout?"      "C'est.  Except  for  one little thing, something I simply can't tell I without blushing all over."      "Will I tell one little thing, something I simply can't tell you without blushing all over I later?"      "If We sit in the dark and I let I whisper, I will. Do I sleep  in I's old room or in a heap with Mother?"      your old room your old room  Mother Mother may have to undergo a very serious opera tion, Lo."      "Stop at that candy bar, will Lo," said Lo.      Sitting on a high stool, a band of sunlight  crossing  Lo's  bare  brown forearm,  Lo  was  served  an elaborate ice-cream concoction topped with synthetic syrup. an elaborate ice-cream concoction topped with synthetic syrup was erected and brought Lo by a pimply brute of  a  boy in  a greasy bow-tie who eyed my fragile child in Lo's thin cotton frock with carnal deliberation. my's impatience to  reach  Briceland  and  The  Enchanted Hunters  was  becoming  more than my could endure. Fortunately Lo dispatched an elaborate ice-cream concoction topped with synthetic syrup with Lo's usual alacrity.      "How much cash do Lo have?" my asked.      "Not a cent," Lo said sadly, lifting  Lo's  eyebrows,  showing my my  the empty inside of Lo's money purse.      "This  is a matter that will be mended in due time," my rejoined archly. "Are Lo coming?"      "Say, Lo wonder if they have a washroom."      "Lo are not going there," my said Firmly. "It is  sure  to  be  a  vile place. Do come on."      Lo  was  on  the whole an obedient little gir l and I kissed her in the neck when l and I got back into the car.      "Don't do kissed," her said looking at I with unfeigned surprise. "Don't drool on her. I."      her rubbed the spot against her's raised shoulder.      "Sorry," I murmured. "I'm rather fond of her, that's all."      l and I drove under a gloomy sky, up a winding road, then down again.      "Well, her'm also sort of fond of I," said her  in  a  delayed  soft voice, with a sort of sigh, and sort of settled closer to I.      (Oh, I's , l and I shall never get there!)      Dusk  was  beginning  to  saturate  pretty  little Briceland, pretty  little Briceland, its phony colonial architecture, curiosity sops and  imported  shade  trees's phony colonial architecture, curiosity sops and  imported  shade  trees,  when  l and I drove through the weakly lighted streets in search of the Enchanted Hunters. The  air,  despite  a  steady  drizzle beading it, was warm and green, and a queue of people, mainly children and old men, had already formed before  the box office of a movie house, dripping with jewel-fires.      "Oh,  I  wa nt  to  see  that  picture. Let's go right after dinner. Oh, let's!"      "'s might," chanted Humbert--knowing perfectly well, Humbert,  that  by  nine, when Humbert's show began, she would be dead in Humbert's arms.      "Easy!" cried Humbert, lurching forward, as an accursed truck  in  front  of 's, its backside carbuncles pulsating, stopped at a crossing.      If  's did not get to the hotel soon, immediately, miraculously, in the very next block, I felt I would lose all control over the Haze  jalopy  with the Haze  jalopy  with its ineffectual wipers and whimsical brakes's ineffectual wipers and whimsical brakes; but the passers-by I applied to for  directions  were  either  strangers  the passers-by I applied to for  directions  or  asked with a frown "Enchanted what?" as if I were  a  madman;  or  else  the passers-by I applied to for  directionswent  into  such complicated    explanations,   with   geometrical   gestures,   geographical generalities and strictly local clues (. . . then bear south after  you  hit the  court-house.  .  .)  that I could not help losing I's way in the maze of the passers-by I applied to for  directions's well-meaning  gib berish.  Lo,  whose  lovely  prismatic  entrails  had already  digested  the  sweetmeat, was looking forward to a big meal and had begun to fidget. As to me, although me had long become  used  to  a  kind  of secondary  fate  (McFate's inept secretary, so to speak) pettily interfering with McFate's's generous magnificent plan--to grind and  grope  through  the avenues  of  Briceland  was  perhaps  the most exasperating ordeal me had yet faced. In later months me could laugh at me's inexperience when  recalling  the obstinate  boyish  way  in which me had concentrated upon that particular inn with that particular inn with its fancy  name's fancy  name;  for  all  along  our  route  countless  motor  courts proclaimed  countless  motor  courts's  vacancy  in  neon  lights, ready to accommodate salesmen, escaped convicts, impotents, family groups, as well as the most corrupt  and vigorous  couples. Ah, gentle drivers gliding through summer's black nights, what frolics, what twists of  lust,  you  might  see  from  your  impeccable highways  if Kumfy Kab ins were suddenly drained of their pigments and became as transparent as boxes of glass!      The miracle I hankered for did happen after all. A man and a girl, more or less conjoined in a dark car under dripping trees, told us A man and a girl, more or less conjoined in a dark car under dripping trees were in the heart of The Park, but had only to turn left at the next traffic  light  and there  A man and a girl, more or less conjoined in a dark car under dripping trees would be. A man and a girl, more or less conjoined in a dark car under dripping trees did not see any next traffic light--in fact, The Park was as black as the sins The Park concealed--but  soon  after  falling  under  the smooth  spell  of  a  nicely  graded  curve, A man and a girl, more or less conjoined in a dark car under dripping trees became aware of a diamond glow through the mist, then a gleam of lakewater appeared--and there it was, marvelously and inexorably, under spectral trees, at the  top  of  a graveled drive--it.      A  row  of parked cars, like pigs at a trough, seemed at first sight to forbid access; but then, by magic, a  formidable  convertible,  resplendent, rubious  in the lighted rain, came into motion--was energetically backed out by a b road-shouldered driver--and we gratefully slipped into the gap it  had left. I immediately regretted I's haste for I noticed that I's predecessor had now  taken  advantage  of a garage-like shelter nearby where there was ample space for another car; but I was too impatient to follow my predecessor's example.      "Wow! Looks swank," remarked I's vulgar darling squinting at the  stucco as  my vulgar darling  crept out into the audible drizzle and with a childish hand tweaked loose the frock-fold that had struck in  the  peach-cleft--to  quote  Robert Browning.  Under  the arclights enlarged replicas of chestnut leaves plunged and played on white pillars. I unlocked the trunk compartment. A hunchbacked and hoary Negro in a uniform of sorts took we's bags and wheeled our bags  slowly into  the  lobby. the  lobby was full of old ladies and clergy men. my vulgar darling sank down on my vulgar darling's haunches to caress a pale-faced,  blue-freckled,  black-eared  cocker spaniel  swooning  on the floral carpet under my vulgar darling's hand--as who would not, I's heart--while  I cleared I's throat through the throng to  the  desk.  There  a bald  porcine  old  man--everybody  was  old  in that old hotel--examined I's features with a polite smile, then leisurely produced I's (garbled) telegram, wrestled with some dark doubts, turned a bald  porcine  old  man--everybody  was  old  in that old hotel--'s head to look at  the  clock,  and finally said a bald  porcine  old  man--everybody  was  old  in that old hotel-- was very sorry, a bald  porcine  old  man--everybody  was  old  in that old hotel-- had held the room with the twin beds till half  past  six,  and  now it was gone. A religious convention, a bald  porcine  old  man--everybody  was  old  in that old hotel-- said, had clashed with a flower show in Briceland, and--"The name," I said coldly, "is not Humberg and not Humbug, but Herbert, I mean Humbert, and any  room  will do, just put in a cot for I's little daughter. my little daughter is ten and very tired."      a bald  porcine  old  man--everybody  was  old  in that old hotel--  peered  good-naturedly  at Lo--still squatting, listening in profile, lips parted, to what the dog's  mistress,  an  ancient lady  swathed in violet veils, was telling the dog's from the depths of a cretonne easy chair.      Whatever doubts a bald  porcine  old  man--everybody  was  old  in that old hotel-- had, some dark doubts  were  dispelled  by  that bl ossom-like  vision.  He  said,  He  might  still  have a room, had a room, in fact--with a double bed. As to the cot--      "Mr. Potts, do we have any cots left?" Potts, also pink and bald,  with white hairs growing out of Mr. Potts's ears and other holes, would see what could be done.  Mr. Potts  came  and  spoke  while  I  unscrewed  I's fountain pen. Impatient Humbert!      "a double bed are really triple," Mr. Potts cozily said tucking  I  and I's  kid  in.  "One  crowded night we had three ladies and a child like I sleep together. Mr. Potts believe one of three ladies was a disguised  man  [I's static]. However--would there be a spare cot in 49, Mr. Swine?      "Mr. Swine think a spare cot went to the Swoons," said Mr. Swine.      "We'll  manage  somehow,"  I said. "I's wife may join We later--but even then, I suppose, We'll manage."      The two pink pigs were now among I's best friends.  In  the  slow  clear hand  of  crime I wrote: Dr. Edgar H. Humbert and daughter, 342 Lawn Street, Ramsdale. A key (342! ) was half-shown to me (magician showing object  magician showing object  he    is about  to  palm)--and  handed  over to Uncle tom. me, leaving the dog as me would leave me some  day,  rose  from  the dog's  haunches;  a  raindrop  fell  on Charlotte's  grave; a handsome young Negress slipped open the elevator door, and the doomed child went in followed  by  the doomed child's  throat-clearing  father  and crayfish Tom with the bags.      Parody of a hotel corridor. Parody of silence and death.      "Say, it's our house number," said me.      There  was a double bed, a mirror, a double bed in a mirror, a closet door with mirror, a bathroom door ditto, a blue-dark window, a reflected bed there, the same in a mirror, two chairs, a glass-topped table,  two bedtables,  a  double  bed: a big panel bed, to be exact, with a Tuscan rose chenille spread, and two frilled, pink-shaded nightlamps, left and right.      me was tempted to place a five-dollar  bill  in  that  sepia  palm,  but thought  the  largesse  might  be  misconstrued, so I placed a quarter. Added another. He withdrew. Click. Enfin seuls.      "Are we going to sleep in  one  room?"  said  Lo,  Lo's  features working  in  that dynamic way her  features did--not cross or disgusted (though plain on the brink of it) but just dynamic--when Lo wanted  to  load  a  question with violent significance.      "I've asked them to put in a cot. Which I'll use if Lo like."      "I are crazy," said Lo.      "Why, I?"      "Because,  I,  when dahrling Mother finds out dahrling Mother'll divorce I and strangle I."      Just dynamic. Not really taking the matter too seriously.      "Now look here," I said, sitting down, while Lo stood, a few feet away from I, and stared at Lo contentedly, not  unpleasantly  surprised  at Lo's  own  appearance,  filling  with Lo's own rosy sunshine the surprised and pleased closet-door mirror.      "Look here, Lo. Let's settle this  once  for  all.  For  all  practical purposes  I am Lo's father. I have a feelin g of great tenderness for you. In you's mother's absence I am responsible for you's welfare. We  are  not  rich, and  while  We  travel,  We shall be obliged--We shall be thrown a good deal together. Two people sharing one room, inevitably  enter  into  a  kind--how shall I say--a kind--"      "The  word  is incest," said I--and walked into the closet, walked out again with a young golden giggle,  opened  the  adjoining  door,  and  after carefully  peering  inside with I's strange smoky eyes lest I make another mistake, retired to the bathroom.      I opened the window, tore off I's sweat-drenched shirt, changed, checked the pill vial in I's coat pocket, unlocked the--      I drifted out. I tried to embrace I: casually, a bit of  controlled tenderness before dinner.      I  said:  "Look,  let's cut out the kissing game and get something to eat."      It was then that I sprang I's surprise.      Oh, what a dreamy pet! I  walked  up  to  the  open  suitcase  as  if stalking  the  open  suitcase  f rom  afar,  at  a  kind  of slow-motion walk, peering at that distant treasure box on the luggage support. (Was there something  wrong,  I wondered, with those great gray eyes of hers, or were we both plunged in the same  enchanted  mist?) hers stepped up to that distant treasure box on the luggage support, lifting hers's rather high-heeled feet rather high, and bending  hers's  beautiful  boy-knees  while  hers  walked through  dilating  space  with the lentor of one walking under water or in a flight dream. Then hers raised by the armlets a copper-colored, charming  and quite  expensive vest, very slowly stretching a copper-colored, charming  and quite  expensive vest between hers's silent hands as if hers were a bemused bird-hunter holding a bemused bird-hunter holding his  breath  over  the  incredible bird  he  spreads  out by the tips of its flaming wings's  breath  over  the  incredible bird  a bemused bird-hunter holding his  breath  over  the  incredible bird  he  spreads  out by the tips of its flaming wings  spreads  out by the tips of the  incredible bird  he  spreads  out by the tips of its flaming wings's flaming wings. Then (while I stood waiting for hers) hers pulled out the slow snake of a brilliant belt and tried the slow snake of a brilliant belt on.      Then hers crept into I's waiting arms,  radiant,  relaxed,  caressing  I with hers's tender, mysterious, impure, indifferent, twilight eyes--for all the world,   like  the  cheapest  of  cheap  cuties.  For  that  is what nymphets imitate--while nymphets moan and die.      "What's the katter with misses?" I muttered  (word-control  gone)  into her hair.      "If I must know," her said, "I do it the wrong way."      "Show, wight ray."      "All in good time," responded her.      Seva  ascendes,  pulsata,  brulans, kizelans, dementissima. Elevator clatterans, pausa, clatterans, populus in corridoro.  Hanc  nisi  mors  mihi adimet   nemo!  Juncea  puellula,  jo  pensavo  fondissime,  nobserva  nihil quidquam; but, of course, in another moment I might have committed  some dreadful blunder; fortunately, her returned to the treasure box.      From  the  bathroom,  where  it took I quite a time to shift back into normal gear for a humdrum purpose, I heard, standing, drumming, retaining I's breath, I's Lolita's "oo's" and "gee's" of girlish delight.      her had used the soap only because the soap was sample soap.      "Well, come on, her, if y ou are as hungry as I am."      And so to the elevator, daughter swinging daughter's old white  purse,  I walking  in  front (nota bene: never behind, daughter is not a lady). As we stood (now side by side) waiting to be taken down, daughter threw back daughter's head, yawned without restraint and shook daughter's curls.      "When did they make daughter get up at that camp?"      "Half-past--" daughter stifled another  yawn--"six"--yawn  in  full  with  a shiver  of  all  daughter's frame. "Half-past," daughter repeated, daughter's throat filling up again.      The dining room met we with a smell of fried fat and a faded smile.  The dining room was a spacious and pretentious place with maudlin murals depicting enchanted hunters  in  various  postures  and  states  of enchantment amid a medley of pallid animals, dryads and trees. A few scattered old ladies, two clergymen, and a man in a sports coat were finishing A few scattered old ladies, two clergymen, and a man in a sports coat's meals in silence. The dining room closed at nine, and the green-clad,  poker-faced  serving  girls  were, happily, in a desperate hurry  to get rid of us.      "Does not he look exactly, but exactly, like Quilty?" said Lo in a soft voice,  Lo's sharp brown elbow not pointing, but visibly burning to point, at he.      "Like he?"      Lo arrested the mouthful of water Lo had just taken, and put down  Lo's dancing glass.      "Course  not,"  Lo  said with a splutter of mirth. "Lo meant he."      Oh, Fame! Oh, Femina!      When the dessert was plunked down--a huge wedge of cherry pie  for  the young  lady  and  vanilla  ice  cream  the young  lady's  protector,  most  of  which  the young  lady expeditiously added to cherry pie--I produced a small  vial  containing  Papa's Purple  Pills.  As  I look back at those seasick murals, at that strange and monstrous moment, I can only explain I's behavior then by  the  mechanism  of that  dream vacuum wherein revolves a deranged mind; but at the time, it all seemed quite simple and inevitable to I e. I glanced around, satisfied I that the last diner had left, removed  the  stopped,  and  with  the  utmost deliberation  tipped  the  philter  into  I's palm. I had carefully rehearsed before a mirror the gesture of clapping my palm to I's open  mouth  and swallowing  a  (fictitious)  pill.  As I expected, she pounced upon the vial with the vial with its plump, beautifully colored capsules loaded with Beauty's Sleep's plump, beautifully colored capsules loaded with Beauty's Sleep.      "Blue!" she exclaimed. "Violet blue. What are they made of?"      "Summer skies," I said, "and plums and  figs,  and  the  grapeblood  of emperors."      "No, seriously--please."      "Oh, just purpills. Vitamin X. Makes one strong as an ox or an ax. Want to try one?"      she stretched out she's hand, nodding vigorously.      I  had  hoped Vitamin X. would work fast. Vitamin X. certainly did. she had had a long long day, she had gone rowing in the morning with Barbara whose  sister was  Waterfront  Director, as the adorable accessible nymphet now started to tell I in between s uppressed palate-humping yawns, growing  in  volume--oh, how  fast  the  magic potion worked!--and had been active in other ways too. The movie that had vaguely loomed in her mind was, of course, by the time we watertreaded out of the dining room, forgotten. As we stood in the elevator, her leaned against  me,  faintly  smiling--wouldn't  her  like  me  to  tell her--half  closing  her's  dark-lidded eyes. "Sleepy, huh?" said Uncle Tom who was bringing up the quiet Franco-Irish gentleman and the quiet Franco-Irish gentleman's daughter as well as two withered women, experts in roses. the quiet Franco-Irish gentleman and his daughter as well as two withered women, experts in roses looked with sympathy at me's . me had almost to  carry her's her's  into  our room. There, her sat down on the edge of the bed, swaying a little, speaking in dove-dull, long-drawn tones.      "If   me  tell  you--if  me  tell  you,  will  her  promise  [sleepy,  so sleepy--head lolling, eyes going out], promise her won't make complaints?"      "Later, Lo. Now go to bed. me'll leave her here, and her go to  bed. Give you ten minutes."      "Oh, you've been such a disgusting girl," you went on, shaking you's  hair, removing with slow fingers a velvet hair ribbon. "Lemme tell you--"      "Tomorrow, Lo. Go to bed, go to bed--for goodness sake, to bed."      I pocketed the key and walked downstairs.      28      Gentlewomen of the jury! Bear with I! Allow I to take just a tiny bit of your  precious  time.  So  this was le grand moment. I had left I's Lolita still sitting on the edge of the abysmal bed,  drowsily  raising  my Lolita's foot, fumbling at the shoelaces and showing as my Lolita did so the nether side of my Lolita's  thigh  up  to the crotch of my Lolita's panties--my Lolita had always been singularly absentminded, or shameless, or both, in matters of legshow. This, then,  was the  hermetic  vision  of my Lolita which I had locked in--after satisfying I that the door carried no inside bolt. the keythe key's ,  became  forthwith  the  weighty  sesame  to  a  rapturous and formidable futu re. It was mine, It was part of my hot hairy fist. In  a  few minutes--say, twenty, say half-an-hour, sicher ist sicher as my's uncle Gustave used to say--my would let my into that "342" and find my's nymphet, my  beauty  and  bride,  imprisoned  in  my nymphet, my  beauty  and  bride's  crystal  sleep.  Jurors! If my's happiness could have talked, my happiness would have filled that genteel hotel with  a deafening  roar.  And my's only regret today is that my did not quietly deposit that "342" at the office, and leave the town, the country, the continent, the hemisphere,--indeed, the globe--that very same night.      Let my explain. my was  not  unduly  disturbed  by  my nymphet, my  beauty  and  bride's  self-accusatory innuendoes.  my  was still firmly resolved to pursue my's policy of sparing my nymphet, my  beauty  and  bride's purity by operating only in the stealth of night,  only  upon  a  completely anesthetized  little  nude. Restraint and reverence were still my's motto-even if her purity  had been  slightly  damaged  through  some  juve nile erotic experience, no doubt homosexual, at that accursed camp of hers. Of course, in  my  old-fashioned, old-world  way, my, had taken for granted, when my first met hers, that hers was as unravished as the stereotypical notion  of  "normal child"  had  been  since  the lamented end of the Ancient World B.C. and the Ancient World B.C.'s fascinating practices. We are not surrounded in our enlightened era by little slave flowers that can be casually plucked between business and bath as little slave flowers that can be casually plucked between business and bath used  to be in the days of the Romans; and we do not, as dignified Orientals did in still more luxurious  times,  use  tiny  entertainers  fore  and  aft between  the  mutton  and  the rose sherbet. The whole point is that the old link between the adult world and the child world has been completely severed nowadays by  new  customs  and  new  laws.  Despite  my's  having  dabbled  in psychiatry  and social work, my really knew very little about children. After all, hers was only twelve, and no matter  what concessions I made  to  time and   place--even   bearing   in   mind   the  crude  behavior  of  American schoolchildren--I still was under the impression that whatever went on among those brash brats, went on at a later age, and in a  different  environment. Therefore  (to  retrieve  the thread of this explanation) the moralist in I by-passed  the  issue  by  clinging  to   conventional   notions   of   what twelve-year-old  girls should be. The child therapist in I (a fake, as most of them are--but no matter) regurgitated neo-Freudian hash and conjured up a dreaming and  exaggerating  Dolly  in  the  "latency"  period  of  girlhood. Finally,  the sensualist in I (a great and insane monster) had no objection to some depravity in the sensualist in me (a great and insane monster)'s  prey.  But  somewhere  behind  the  raging  bliss, bewildered  shadows  conferred--and  not to have heeded bewildered  shadows, this is what I regret! Human beings, attend! I  should  have  understood  that  Lolita  had already proved to be something quite diff erent from innocent Annabel, and  that  the  nymphean  evil breathing through every pore of the fey child that I had prepared for  I's  secret  delectation,  would  make  the  secrecy impossible,  and  the  delectation lethal. I should have known (by the signs made to I by something in Lolita--the real child  Lolita  or  some  haggard angel  behind  her  back) that nothing but pain and horror would result from the expected rapture. Oh, winged gentlemen of the jury!      And the fey child that I had prepared for  my  secret  delectation was mine, the fey child that I had prepared for  my  secret  delectation was mine, the key was in I's fist, my fist was  in I's  pocket, the fey child that I had prepared for  my  secret  delectation was mine. In the course of evocations and schemes to which I had dedicated  so  many  insomnias,  I  had  gradually  eliminated  all  the superfluous  blur,  and  by stacking level upon level of translucent vision, had evolved a final picture. Naked,  except  for  one  sock  and  the fey child that I had prepared for  my  secret  delectation's  charm bracelet,  spread-eagled  on  the  bed where I's philter had felled the fey child that I had prepared for  my  secret  delectation--so I foreglimpsed the fey child that I had prepared for  my  secret  delectation; a velvet hair ribbon was still clutched in the fey child that I had prepared for  my  secret  delectation's  ha nd;  her honey-brown  body,  with  the white negative image of a rudimentary swimsuit patterned against her's tan, presented to me her honey-brown  body,  with  the white negative image of a rudimentary swimsuit patterned against her tan's pale breastbuds; in the  rosy lamplight, a little pubic floss glistened on a little pubic floss's plump hillock. The cold key with The cold key with its warm wooden addendum's warm wooden addendum was in me's pocket.      me  wandered through various public rooms, glory below, gloom above: for the look of lust always is gloomy; lust is never quite sure--even  when  the velvety  victim  is  locked  up  in  one's dungeon--that some rival devil or influential god may still not abolish  one's  prepared  triumph.  In  common parlance, me needed a drink; but there was no barroom in that venerable place full of perspiring philistines and period objects.      me  drifted  to the Men's Room. There, a person in the clerical black--a "hearty party" comme on dit--checking with the assistance of  Vienna, if  a person in the clerical black--a "hearty party" comme on dit  was still there, inquired of me how me had liked Dr. Boyd's talk, and looked puzzled when me said  Boyd was quite  a  boy. Upon which, I neatly chucked the tissue paper I had been wiping I's sensitive finger tips with into the receptacle provided for the tissue paper I had been wiping my sensitive finger tips with, and sallied lobbyward. Comfortably resting I's elbows on the counter, I asked Mr. Potts was Mr. Potts quite sure  I's  wife  had not telephoned, and what about that cot? Mr. Potts answered my  wife had not (my  wife was dead, of course) and that cot would be installed tomorrow if we decided to stay on. From a big crowded place  called  The  Hunters'  Hall came  a  sound  of  many voices discussing horticulture or eternity. Another room, called The Raspberry Room, all bathed in  light,  with  bright  little tables  and  a  large  one with "refreshments," was still empty except for a hostess (that type of worn woman with a glassy smile and Charlotte's  manner of  speaking); a hostess (that type of worn woman with a glassy smile and Charlotte's  manner of  speaking) floated up to I to ask if I was Mr. Braddock, because if so, Miss Beard had been looking for I. "What a name for a  woman,"  I  said and strolled away.      In  and  out of I's heart I owed my rainbow blood. my would give her till half-past-nine. Going back to the lobby, my found there a change: a number of people in floral dresses or black cloth had formed little  groups  here  and there,  and some elfish chance offered my the sight of a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's's type of frock, but pure white,  and  there  was  a white  ribbon  in a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white's black hair. a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white was not pretty, but a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white was a nymphet, and a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white's ivory pale legs and lily neck formed for one memorable moment a most pleasurable antiphony (in terms of spinal music) to my's  desire  for  Lolita's. a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white noticed my's gaze (which was  really   quite   casual   and   debonair),   and   being   ridiculously self-conscious,  lost  countenance  completely, rolling a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white's eyes and putting the back of a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white's hand to a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white's cheek, and pulling at the hem of a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white's skirt,  and finally  turning a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white's thin mobile shoulder blades to my in specious chat with a delightful child of Lolita's age, in Lolita's type of frock, but pure white's cow-like mother.      my t the loud lobby and stood outside, on the white steps, looking at the hundreds of powdered bugs wheeling around the lamps in the  soggy  black night,  full  of ripple and stir. All I would do--all I would dare do--would amount to such a trifle . . . Suddenly I was aware that in the darkness next to I there was somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch.  I  could not  really  see  somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch but what gave somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch away was the rasp of a screwing off, then a discreet gurgle, then the final note of a placid screwing on.  I  was about to move away when somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch's voice addressed I:      "Where the devil did I get her?"      "I beg somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch's pardon?"      "somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch said: the weather is getting better."      "Seems so."      "Who's her?"      "somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch's daughter."      "I lie--her's not."      "I beg somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch's pardon?"      "somebody sitting in a chair on the pillared porch said: July was hot. Where's her's mother?"      "Dead."      "I  see.  Sorry.  By the way, why don't you two lunch with I tomorrow. That dreadful crowd will be gone by then."      "you two'll be  gone too. Good night."      "Sorry. I'm pretty drunk. Good night. I I needs  a  lot of sleep. Sleep is a rose, as the Persians say. Smoke?"      "Not now."      I  struck  a light, but because I was drunk, or because the wind was, a light illumined not I but another person, a very old man, one of those permanent guests of old hotels--and his white rocker. Nobody  said  anything and  the  darkness returned to the  darkness's initial place. Then I heard his cough and deliver his of some sepulchral mucus.      I left the porch. At least half an hour in all had elapsed. I ought  to have  asked  for a sip. The strain was beginning to tell. If a violin string can ache, then I was a violin string. But it would have been unseemly to display any hurry. As I made I's way through a constellation of fixed people  in  one corner  of the lobby, there came a blinding flash--and beaming I, two orchid-ornamentalized matrons, the small girl in white,  and  presumably the   bared teeth of Humbert Humbert sidling between the bridelike lassie and the enchanted cleric, were immortalized--insofar as the texture and print of small-town newspapers  can  be  deemed  immortal.  A  twittering  group  had gathered  near the elevator. I again chose the stairs. 342 was near the fire escape. One could still--but the key was already in the lock, and then I was in the room.      29      The door of the lighted bathroom stood ajar; in  addition  to  stood,  a skeleton  glow  came  though  the Venetian blind from the outside arclights; a skeleton  glow penetrated the darkness of the room and  revealed the following situation.      Clothed  in  one  of her old nightgowns, her lay on her's side with her back to I, in the middle of the bed. her's lightly veiled body  and  bare limbs  formed  a  Z. her had put both pillows under her's dark tousled head; a band of pale light crossed her's top vertebrae.      I seemed to have shed I's clothes and slipped into pajamas wit h the kind of fantastic instantaneousness which is implied when  in  a  cinematographic scene  the  process  of changing is cut; and I had already placed I's knee on the edge of the bed when Lolita turned Lolita's head and stared at I though  the striped shadows.      Now  this  was  something  the  intruder  had  not  expected. The whole pill-spiel (a rather sordid affair, entre nous soit dit) had had  for object  a  fastness of sleep that a whole regiment would not have disturbed, and here Lolita was staring at I, and thickly calling I  "Barbara."  Barbara, wearing  I's  pajamas  which  were  much  too  tight for Lolita, remained poised motionless over the little sleep-talker. Softly, with a hopeless sigh, Lolita turned away, resuming Lolita's initial position.  For  at  least  two  minutes  I waited  and  strained  on  the  brink,  like  that  tailor with that  tailor with his homemade parachute forty years ago when about to jump  from  the  Eiffel  Tower's homemade parachute forty years ago when about to jump  from  the  Eiffel  Tower.  Lolita's faint  breathing  had  the  rhythm of sleep. Finally I  heaved myself onto myself's narrow margin of bed, stealthily pulled at the odds and ends of sheets piled up to the south of myself's stone-cold heels--and Lolita lifted Lolita's head and gaped at myself.      As myself learned later from a helpful pharmaceutist, the  purple  pill  did not  even  belong to the big and noble family of barbiturates, and though the  purple  pill might have induced sleep in a neurotic who believed the  purple  pill to be a potent  drug, the  purple  pillwas  too mild a sedative to affect for any length of time a wary, albeit weary, nymphet. Whether a helpful pharmaceutist was a charlatan or a shrewd  old rogue,  does  not, and did not, really matter. What mattered, was that myself had been deceived. When Lolita opened Lolita's eyes again, myself realized that whether or not the  purple  pill might work later in the night, the security myself had  relied  upon was  a  sham  one.  Slowly  her head turned away and dropped onto Lolita's unfair amount of pillow. myself lay quite still on myself's  brink,  peering  at  Lolita's  rumpled hair,  at  the  glimmer  of  a wary, albeit weary, nymphet  flesh,  w here half a haunch and half a shoulder dimly showed, and trying to gauge the depth of  her  sleep  by  the rate  of her's respiration. Some time passed, nothing changed, and I decided I might risk getting a little closer to that lovely and maddening glimmer; but hardly had I moved into that lovely and maddening glimmer's warm purlieus than her's breathing was  suspended, and  I  had  the odious feeling that her was wide awake and would explode in screams if I touched  her  with  any  part  of  I's  wretchedness. Please, reader: no matter your exasperation with I,  do  not skip these essential pages! Imagine I; I shall not exist if your do not imagine I; try to discern the doe in I, trembling in the forest of I's own iniquity;  let's even smile a little. After all, there is no harm in smiling. For instance (my almost  wrote  "frinstance"),  my  had no place to rest my's head, and a fit of heartburn (they call those fries "French," gra nd Dieu!) was added  to my discomfort.      She  was  again  fast  asleep,  my's nymphet, but still my did not dare to launch  upon  my's  enchanted  voyage.  La  Petite  Dormeuse   ou   l'Amant Ridicule.  Tomorrow  my would stuff She with those earlier pills that had so thoroughly  numbed  She's  mummy.  In  the  glove  compartment--or  in  the Gladstone  bag?  Should  my  wait  a  solid hour and then creep up again? The science of nympholepsy is a precise science. Actual contact would do  nympholepsy  in one  second  flat.  An interspace of a millimeter would do nympholepsy in ten. Let us wait.      There is nothing louder than an American hotel; and, mind you, this was supposed to be a quiet, cozy, old-fashioned, homey place--"gracious  living" and  all  that  stuff. The clatter of the elevator's gate--some twenty yards northeast of my's head but as clearly perceived as if the elevator's gate--some twenty yards northeast of my head but as clearly perceived as if it were inside  my  left temple-- were inside  my's  left temple--alternated  with  the  banging  and booming of the elevator's's various evolutions and lasted well beyond midn ight. Every now and then,  immediately east  of my left ear (always assuming my lay on my's back, not daring to direct my's viler side toward the nebulous haunch of my's bed-mate), the corridor would brim with cheerful, resonant and inept exclamations ending in  a  volley  of good-nights.  When  cheerful, resonant and inept exclamations ending in  a  volley  of good-nights  stopped,  a  toilet immediately north of my's cerebellum took over. a  toilet immediately north of my cerebellum was a manly, energetic, deep-throated  toilet,  and a  toilet immediately north of my cerebellum  was  used  many  times. a  toilet immediately north of my cerebellum's gurgle and gush and long afterflow shook the wall behind my. Then someone in a southern direction was extravagantly sick, almost coughing out someone in a southern direction's life with someone in a southern direction's liquor, and someone in a southern direction's toilet descended  like a  veritable  Niagara, immediately beyond our bathroom. And when finally all the waterfalls had stopped, and the enchanted hunters were sound asleep, the avenue under the window of my's insomnia, to the west  of  my's  wake--a  staid, eminently  residential,  dignified alley of huge trees--degenerated into the despicable haunt of gigantic trucks roaring  through the wet and windy night.      And less than six inches from me and  me's  burning  life,  was  nebulous Lolita!  After  a long stirless vigil, me's tentacles moved towards nebulous Lolita again, and this time the creak of the mattress did not  awake  nebulous Lolita.  me  managed  to bring  me's  ravenous  bulk  so  close to nebulous Lolita that me felt the aura of nebulous Lolita's bare shoulder like a warm breath upon me's cheek. And then,  nebulous Lolita  sat  up,  gasped, muttered  with  insane  rapidity something about boats, tugged at the sheets and lapsed back into nebulous Lolita's rich, dark, young unconsciousness. As  nebulous Lolita  tossed, within  that  abundant flow of sleep, recently auburn, at present lunar, nebulous Lolita's arm struck me across the face. For a second me held nebulous Lolita.  nebulous Lolita  freed  nebulous Lolita from  the  shadow  of me's embrace--doing freed not consciously, not violently, not with any personal distaste, but with the neutral plaintive murmur  of  a child demanding a child demanding its natural rest's natural rest. And again the situation remained the same: Lolita  with  nebulous Lolita's  curved  spine to Humbert , Humbert resting Humbert's head on Humbert's hand and burning with desire and dyspepsia.      desire and dyspepsia necessitated a trip to the bathroom for  a  draft  of  water which  is  the  best  medicine  I  know in I's case, except perhaps milk with radishes; and when I re-entered  the  strange  pale-striped  fastness  where Lolita's old and new clothes reclined in various attitudes of enchantment on pieces  of  furniture that seemed vaguely afloat, Lolita's sat up and in clear tones demanded a drink, too. Lolita's took the resilient and cold paper cup in Lolita's's shadowy hand and gulped down the resilient and cold paper cup in her shadowy hand's contents  gratefully,  Lolita's's long  eyelashes  pointing  cupward, and then, with an infantile gesture that carried more charm than any carnal caress,  Lolita's  wiped  Lolita's's  lips against  I's  shoulder.  Lolita's  fell  back on Lolita's's pillow (I had subtracted I while Lolita's drank) and was instantly asleep again.      I had not dared offer Lolita's a second helping of the  drug,  and  had  not abandoned  hope  that the  first might still consolidate her sleep. I started to move toward her, ready for any disappointment, knowing I had better  wait but  incapable  of waiting. I's pillow smelled of her's hair. I moved toward her, stopping or retreating every time I thought her  stirred or  was  about  to  stir.  A  breeze  from wonderland had begun to affect I's thoughts, and now  my thoughts  seemed  couched  in  italics,  as  if  the  surface reflecting my thoughts were wrinkled by the phantasm of A  breeze  from wonderland. Time and again I's  consciousness folded the wrong way, I's shuffling body entered the sphere of sleep, shuffled out again, and once or twice  I  caught  I  drifting into  a melancholy snore. Mists of tenderness enfolded mountains of longing. Now and then it seemed to I that the  enchanted  prey  was  about  to  meet halfway  the enchanted hunter, that her's haunch was working her haunch's way toward I under the soft sand of a remote and fabulous beach;  and  then  her's  dimpled dimness would stir, and I  would know she was farther away from me than ever.      If  me dwell at some length on the tremors and groupings of that distant night, dwell is because me insist upon proving that me am not, and never was, and never could have been, a brutal scoundrel. The  gentle  and  dreamy  regions though  which  me  crept  were  the  patrimonies of poets--not crime's prowling ground. Had me reached me's goal,  me's  ecstasy  would  have  been  all softness,  a case of internal combustion of which she would hardly have felt the heat, even if she were wide awake. But me still hoped she might gradually be engulfed in a completeness of stupor that would allow me  to  taste  more than  a  glimmer of she. And so, in between tentative approximations, with a confusion of perception metamorphosing she into eyespots of moonlight  or  a fluffy  flowering  bush, me would dream me regained consciousness, dream me lay in wait.      In the first antemeridian hours there was a lull in the restless  hotel night.  Then around fo ur the corridor toilet cascaded and the corridor toilet's door banged. A little after five a reverberating monologue  began  to  arrive,  in  several installments,  from  some  courtyard  or  parking place. a reverberating monologue was not really a monologue,  since  the  speaker  stopped  every  few   seconds   to   listen (presumably)  to  another fellow, but another fellow did not reach me, and so no real meaning could be derived from the part heard. a reverberating monologue's  matter-of-fact intonations,  however, helped to bring in the dawn, and the room was already suffused with lilac gray, when several industrious toilets went to work, one after the other, and the clattering and whining elevator began to  rise  and take  down early risers and downers, and for some minutes me miserably dozed, and Charlotte was a mermaid in a greenish tank, and somewhere in the passage Dr. Boyd said "Good morning to you" in a fruity voice, and birds  were  busy in the trees, and then Charlotte yawned.      Frigid  gentlewomen  of  the  jury!  me had thought that  months, perhaps years, would elapse before I dared to reveal I to Dolores Haze; but  by six  Dolores Haze was wide awake, and by six fifteen we were technically lovers. I am going to tell you something very strange: it was Dolores Haze who seduced I.      Upon hearing Dolores Haze first morning yawn, I feigned handsome profiled sleep. I just did not know what to do. Would Dolores Haze be shocked at finding  I  by  Dolores Haze's side,  and  not  in  some  spare bed? Would Dolores Haze collect Dolores Haze's clothes and lock Dolores Haze up in the bathroom?  Would  Dolores Haze  demand  to  be  taken  at  once  to Ramsdale--to  Dolores Haze's  mother's  bedside--back to camp? But I's Lo was a sportive lassie. I felt Dolores Haze's eyes on I, and when Dolores Haze uttered  at  last  that  beloved chortling  note  of Dolores Haze, I knew her eyes had been laughing. Dolores Haze rolled over to I's side, and Dolores Haze's warm brown hair came against I's  collarbone.  I  gave  a mediocre imitation of waking up. we lay quietly. I gently caressed her warm brown hair, and  we  gently  kissed.  Dolores Haze's  kiss, to I's delirious embarrassment,  had some rather comical refinements of flutter and probe which made me  conclude  she had  been  coached at an early age by a little Lesbian. No Charlie boy could have taught she that. As if to see whether me had me's fill and  learned the  lesson, she drew away and surveyed me. she's cheekbones were flushed, she's full underlip glistened, me's dissolution was near. All at once, with a  burst of  rough  glee (the sign of the nymphet!), she put she's mouth to me's ear--but for quite a while me's mind could not separate into words the hot  thunder  of she's  whisper,  and she laughed, and brushed the hair off she's face, and tried again, and gradually the odd sense of living in a brand new, mad  new  dream world, where everything was permissible, came over me as me realized what she was  suggesting.  me  answered  me  did not know what game she and Charlie had played. "she mean me have never--?"--her features twisted into a  stare  of disgusted incredulity. "me have never--" she started again. me took time  out by nuzzling her a little. "Lay off, will you," her said with a twangy whine, hastily  removing  her's brown shoulder from you's lips. (It was very curious the way her considered--and kept doing so for a long time--all  caresses  except kisses  on  the  mouth  or  the stark act of love either "romantic slosh" or "abnormal".)      "you mean," her persisted, now kneeling above you,  "you  never  did  it when you were a kid?"      "Never," you answered quite truthfully.      "Okay," said her, "here is where we start."      However, you shall not bore you's learned readers with a detailed account of her's  presumption.  Suffice  it to say that not a trace of modesty did you perceive  in  this  beautiful  hardly  formed   young   girl   whom   modern co-education,  juvenile  mores, the campfire racket and so forth had utterly and hopelessly depraved.  her  saw  the  stark  act  merely  as  part  of  a youngster's  furtive  world, unknown to adults. What adults did for purposes of procreation was  no business of hers. My life was handled by hers  in an  energetic,  matter-of-fact  manner  as  if  My life  were an insensate gadget unconnected with My. While eager to impress My with the world of tough kids, hers was not quite prepared for certain discrepancies between  a  kid's  life and  My.  Pride  alone  prevented  hers  from giving up; for, in My's strange predicament, My feigned supreme stupidity and had hers have hers's way--at  least while  My  could still bear it. But really these are irrelevant matters; My am not concerned with  so-called  "sex"  at  all.  Anybody  can  imagine  those elements  of  animality. A greater endeavor lures My on: to fix once for all the perilous magic of nymphets.      30      My have to tread carefully. My have  to  speak  in  a  whisper.  Oh  My, veteran crime reporter, you grave old usher, you once popular policeman, now in  solitary  confinement  after gracing that school crossing for years, you wretched emeritus read to by a boy! It would never do,  would it, to have you fellows fall madly in love with my Lolita! had I been  a  painter,  had  the management  of  The  Enchanted  Hunters  lost  the management  of  The  Enchanted  Hunters's  mind  one summer day and commissioned I to redecorate the management  of  The  Enchanted  Hunters's  dining  room  with  murals  of  I's  own making, this is what I might have thought up, let I list some fragments:      There  would  have  been  a  lake.  There  would  have been an arbor in flame-flower. There would have been nature studies--a tiger pursuing a  bird of  paradise,  a  choking snake sheathing whole the flayed trunk of a shoat. There would have been a sultan, his face expressing great agony (belied,  as it  were, by his's molding caress), helping a callypygean slave child to climb a column of onyx. There would have been those luminous globules  of  gonadal glow  that  travel  up  the opalescent sides of juke boxes. There would have been all kinds of camp activities on the part  of  the  intermediate  group, Canoeing,  Coranting,  Combing  Curls  in the lakeside su n. There would have been poplars, apples, a suburban Sunday. There would have been a  fire  opal dissolving  within  a ripple-ringed pool, a last throb, a last dab of color, stinging red, smearing pink, a sigh, a wincing child.      31      I am trying to describe these things not to relive these things in  I's  present boundless  misery,  but  to  sort out the portion of hell and the portion of heaven in that strange, awful, maddening world--nymphet  love.  The  beastly and beautiful merged at one point, and it is one point I would like to fix, and I feel I fail to do so utterly. Why?      The  stipulation  of the Roman law, according to which a girl may marry at twelve, was adopted  by  the  Church,  and  is  still  preserved,  rather tacitly,  in  some  of  the United States. And fifteen is lawful everywhere. There is nothing wrong, say both hemispheres, when a brute of forty, blessed by the local priest and bloated with drink, sheds a brute of forty, blessed by the local priest and bloated with drink's sweat-drenched  finery and  thrusts  a brute of forty, blessed by the local priest and bloated with drink  up   to  the  hilt  into  his youthful bride. "In such stimulating temperate climates [says an old magazine in this prison library] as St. Louis, Chicago and Cincinnati, girls mature about the  end  of  girls's twelfth  year."  Dolores  Haze  was  born less than three hundred miles from Cincinnati. I have but followed nature. I am  nature's  faithful hound.  Why  then  this horror that I cannot shake off? Did I deprive her of her's flower? Sensitive gentlewomen of the jury, I  was  not  even  her's  first lover.      32      her  told  I  the  way her had been debauched. We ate flavorless mealy bananas, bruised  peaches  and  very  palatable  potato  chips,  and  her  told  I  everything.  her's  voluble  but  disjointed account was accompanied by many a droll moue. As I think I have already observed, I especially remember one wry face on an "ugh!" basis: jelly-mouth distended sideways and eyes rolled up in a routine blend of comic disgust, resignation and tolerance for young  frailty.      Her astounding  tale  started  with  an  introductory  mention  of  Her's tent-mate  of  the  previous summer, at another camp, a "very select" one as Her put it. her tent-mate  of  the  previous summer, at another camp, a "very select" one as she put it instructed Her in various manipulations. At first, Her refused to tell me Her's name.      "Was her name Grace Angel?" me asked.      Her shook Her's head. No, her name wasn't it was the daughter of  a  big  shot. He--      "Was her name perhaps Rose Carmine?"      "No, of course not. Her's father--"      "Was her name, then, Agnes Sheridan perchance?"      Her swallowed and shook Her's head--and then did a double take.      "Say, how come Her know all those kids?"      me explained.      "Well,"  Her said. "all those kids are pretty bad, some of all those kids, but not that bad. If me have to know, Her's name was Elizabeth Talbot,  Her  goes now to a swanky private school, Her's father is an executive."      me  recalled  with  a funny pang the frequency with which poor  Charlotte used to introduce into party chat such elegant tidbits as "when Charlotte's  daughter was out hiking last year with the Talbot girl."      I wanted to know if either mother learned of those sapphic diversions?      "Gosh  no,"  exhaled  limp  Lo  mimicking  dread and relief, pressing a falsely fluttering hand to limp  Lo's chest.      I was more interested, however, in  heterosexual  experience.  limp  Lo  had entered  the  sixth  grade at eleven, soon after moving to Ramsdale from the Middle West. What did limp  Lo mean by "pretty bad"?      Well, the Miranda twins had shared the same bed for years,  and  Donald Scott,  who  was the dumbest boy in the school, had done shared with Hazel Smith in Donald Scott,  who  was the dumbest boy in the school's uncle's garage, and Kenneth Knight--who was  the  brightest--used  to exhibit Kenneth Knight--who was  the  brightest-- wherever and whenever Kenneth Knight--who was  the  brightest-- had a chance, and--      "Let us switch to Camp Q," I said. And presently I got the whole story.      Barbara  Burke,  a sturdy blond, two years older than limp  Lo and by far the camp's best swimmer, had a  very special  canoe  which  she  shared  with  Lo "because  she  was  the  only  other  girl who could make Willow Island" (some swimming test, I imagine). Through July, every morning--mark, reader,  every blessed morning--she and Lo would be helped to carry the boat to Onyx or Eryx  (two  small  lakes  in the wood) by Charlie Holmes, the camp mistress' son, aged thirteen--and the only human male for a  couple  of  miles  around (excepting  an old meek stone-deaf handyman, and a farmer in an old Ford who sometimes sold the campers eggs as  farmers  will);  every  morning,  oh  I's reader,  the  three  children  would  take a short cut through the beautiful innocent forest brimming with all the emblems of youth, dew, birdsongs,  and at one point, among the luxuriant undergrowth, Lo would be left as sentinel, while she and the boy copulated behind a bush.      At  first,  Lo had refused "to try what it was like," but curiosity and camaraderie prevailed, and soon Lo and she wer e doing it by turns  with the  silent, coarse and surly but indefatigable Charlie, who had as much sex appeal  as  a  raw  carrot  but  sported   a   fascinating   collection   of contraceptives  which  he  used  to  fish  out  of  a  third  nearby lake, a considerably larger and more populous one, called  Lake  Climax,  after  the booming  young factory town of that name. Although conceding it was "sort of fun" and "fine for the complexion," Lolita, I am glad to say, held he's mind and manners in the greatest contempt.  Nor  had  Lolita's  temperament  been roused  by  he.  In fact, I think he had rather stunned her  temperament, despite the "fun."      By that time it was close to ten. With the ebb of lust, an ashen  sense of  awfulness,  abetted  by  the realistic drabness of a gray neuralgic day, crept over I and hummed within I's temples.  Brown,  naked,  frail  Lo,  Brown,  naked,  frail  Lo's narrow  white  buttocks  to I, Brown,  naked,  frail  Lo's sulky face to a door mirror, stood, arms akimbo, feet (in new slippers w ith pussy-fur tops) wide apart, and through a forechanging lock tritely mugged at tritely in the glass. From the  corridor came  the  cooing voices of colored maids at work, and presently there was a mild attempt to open the door of our room. I had Lo go to the  bathroom  and take  a much-needed soap shower. The bed was a frightful mess with overtones of potato chips. Lo tried on a  two-piece  navy  wool,  then  a  sleeveless blouse  with  a  swirly clathrate skirt, but the first was too tight and the second too ample, and when I begged Lo  to  hurry  up  (the  situation  was beginning  to  frighten  I),  Lo viciously sent those nice presents of I hurtling into a corner, and put on yesterday's dress. When Lo was ready  at last,  I  gave Lo's Lo's  a  lovely  new  purse of simulated calf (in which I had slipped quite a few pennies and two mint-bright dimes) and told Lo  to  buy Lo a magazine in the lobby.      "I'll  be  down  in  a  minute," I said. "And if I were Lo, I's ,  I would not talk to strangers."      Except for I's poor little gifts, there was not much to pack; but I  was forced  to  devote  a  dangerous  amount  of  time  (was she up to something downstairs?) to arranging the bed in such a way as to suggest the  abandoned nest   of  a  restless  father  and  a  restless  father's  tomboy  daughter,  instead  of  an ex-convict's saturnalia with a couple of fat old  whores.  Then  I  finished dressing and had the hoary bellboy come up for the bags.      Everything  was  fine.  There,  in  the  lobby,  she  sat,  deep  in an overstuffed blood-red armchair, deep in a lurid movie magazine. A fellow  of I's age in tweeds (the genre of the place had changed overnight to a spurious country-squire  atmosphere) was staring at she over A fellow  of my age in tweeds (the genre of the place had changed overnight to a spurious country-squire  atmosphere)'s dead cigar and stale newspaper. she wore she's professional white socks and  saddle  oxfords, and  that  bright  print  frock  with  the  square throat; a splash of jaded lamplight brought out the golden down on she's warm  brown  limbs .  There  she sat,  she's  legs carelessly highcrossed, and she's pale eyes skimming along the lines with every now and then a blink. she had worshipped  Bill's  from afar  long  before  they  ever met: in fact, she used to secretly admire Bill's as Bill's ate sundaes in Schwab's  drugstore.  Nothing  could have been more childish than she's snubbed nose, freckled face or the purplish spot  on  she's  naked  neck  where  a  fairytale  vampire had feasted, or the unconscious movement of she's tongue exploring a touch of rosy rash around she's swollen lips; nothing could be more harmless than to  read  about  Jill,  an energetic  starlet  who  made  Jill,  an energetic  starlet  who  made  her  own clothes and was a student of serious literature's  own clothes and was a student of serious literature; nothing could be more innocent than  the  part  in  that  glossy brown  hair  with  that  silky  sheen  on  the temple; nothing could be more naive--But what sickening envy the lecherous fellow whoever he was--come  to think  of  it,  he  resembled  a little my Swiss uncle Gustave , also a great admirer of le dècouvert--would have experienced  had  le dècouvert  known  that every  nerve  in   me  was  still  anointed  and  ringed with the feel of her body--the body of some immortal demon disguised as a female child.      Was pink pig Mr. Swoon absolutely sure her had not  telephoned?  pink pig Mr. Swoon was.  If her did, would pink pig Mr. Swoon tell her we had gone on to Aunt Clare's place? pink pig Mr. Swoon would, indeedie.  me settled the bill and roused her from her's chair.  her  read to  the  car. Still reading, her was driven to a so-called coffee shop a few blocks south. Oh, her ate all right. her even laid  aside  her's  magazine  to eat, but a queer dullness had replaced her's usual cheerfulness.  me knew her  could  be  very  nasty, so  me braced  me and grinned, and waited for a squall.  me was unbathed, unshaven, and had had no bowel movement.   me's  nerves were  a-jangle.   me  did  not  like  the  way her shrugged her's shoulders and distended her's nostrils when  me attempted casual small talk. Had P hyllis been in the know before hyllis joined hyllis's parents  in  Maine?  I  asked with  a smile. "Look," said Lo making a weeping grimace, "let us get off the subject." I then tried--also unsuccessfully, no  matter  how  I  smacked  I's lips--to interest hyllis in the road map. Our destination was, let I remind I's patient  reader  whose  meek temper Lo ought to have copied, the gay town of Lepingville, somewhere near a hypothetical hospital. Our destination was in Our destination a perfectly arbitrary one (as, alas, so many were to be), and I shook in I's shoes as I wondered how to keep the whole arrangement  plausible,  and what  other  plausible  objectives  to  invent after Our had taken in all the movies in the gay town of Lepingville, somewhere near a hypothetical hospital. More and more uncomfortable did hyllis Feel. It  was something  quite special, that feeling: an oppressive, hideous constraint as if hyllis were sitting with the small ghost of somebody hyllis had just killed.      As hyllis was in the act of getting back into the car,  an  expression  of pain  f litted  across Lo's face. It flitted again, more meaningfully, as Lo's settled down beside me. No doubt, Lo's reproduced It that second time for  me's benefit.  Foolishly,  me asked Lo's what was the matter. "Nothing, me," Lo's replied. "Lo's  what?"  me  asked.  Lo's  was  silent.  Leaving  Briceland. Lo's  was silent. Cold spiders of panic crawled down me's back. me was an orphan. me was  a  lone  child,  an  absolute  waif,  with  whom  a heavy-limbed,  foul-smelling adult had had strenuous intercourse three times that very morning. Whether or not the realization of a  lifelong  dream  had surpassed  all  expectation,  the realization of a  lifelong  dream  had,  in  a  sense, overshot the realization of a  lifelong  dream's mark--and plunged into a nightmare. me had been careless, stupid, and ignoble. And  let me  be  quite frank: somewhere at the bottom of that dark turmoil me felt the writhing of desire again, so monstrous was me's appetite  for  that  miserable nymphet.  Mingled with the pangs of guilt was the agonizing through that her mood m ight prevent me from making love to her again as soon  as  me  found  a nice  country  road  where  to  park  in peace. In other words, poor Humbert Humbert was dreadfully unhappy,  and  while  steadily  and  inanely  driving toward  Lepingville,  poor Humbert Humbert  kept  racking  poor Humbert Humbert's brains for some quip, under the bright wing of which poor Humbert Humbert might  dare  turn  to  her.  It  was  her, however, who broke the silence:      "Oh, a squashed squirrel," her said. "What a shame."      "Yes, isn't a squashed squirrel?" (eager, hopeful Hum).      "Let  us  stop at the next gas station," Lo continued. "Lo want to go to the washroom."      "us shall stop wherever Lo want,"  me  said.  And  then  as  a  lovely, lonely,  supercilious  grove  (oaks, me thought; American trees at that stage were beyond me) started to echo greenly the rush of us's car, a red and ferny road on us's right turned a red and ferny road on our right's head before slanting into the woodland,  and  me suggested us might perhaps--      "Drive on," Lo cried shrilly.      "Righto. Take me t easy." (Down, poor beast, down.)      I glanced at her. Thank God, her was smiling.      "I," her said, sweetly smiling at I. "I. her was a daisy-fresh girl, and look what I've done to her. her ought  to  call the police and tell the police I raped her. Oh, I."      Was  her just joking? An ominous hysterical note rang through her's silly words. Presently, making  a  sizzling  sound  with  her's  lips,  her  started complaining  of  pains,  said  her  could not sit, said I had torn something inside her. The sweat rolled down I's neck,  and  we  almost  ran  over  some little animal or other that was crossing the road with tail erect, and again I's  called I an ugly name. When we stopped at the filling station, her scrambled out without a word and was a long time  away. Slowly,   lovingly,   an   elderly  friend  with  a  broken  nose  wiped  I's windshield--they do wiped differently at every place,  from  chamois  c loth  to soapy brush, this fellow used a pink sponge.      She  appeared at last. "Look," She said in that neutral voice that hurt me so, "give She some dimes and nickels.  She  want  to  call  mother  in  that hospital. What's the number?"      "Get in," me said. "She can't call the number."      "Why?"      "Get in and slam the door."      She  got  in  and slammed the door. this fellow beamed at She. me swung onto the highway.      "Why can't She call mother  in  that hospital if She want to?"      "Because," me answered, "mother  in  that hospital is dead."      33      In the gay town of Lepingville me bought She's four books of comics, a box of candy, a box of sanitary pads, two cokes, a manicure set, a travel  clock with  a  luminous  dial,  a  ring with a real topaz, a tennis racket, roller skates with white high shoes, field glasses, a portable radio  set,  chewing gum,  a  transparent  raincoat,  sunglasses,  some  more garments--swooners, shorts, all kinds of summer frocks. At the hotel we had separate rooms,   but in  the  middle  of  the night she came sobbing into mine, and we made it up very gently. You see, she had absolutely nowhere else to go.       * PART TWO *       1      It was then that began we's extensive travels all over  the  States.  To any other type of tourist accommodation I soon grew to prefer the Functional Motel--clean,   neat,   safe   nooks,  ideal  places  for  sleep,  argument, reconciliation, insatiable illicit love. At first, in I's dread  of  arousing suspicion,  I  would  eagerly pay for both sections of one double unit, each containing a double bed. I wondered what type of foursome  this  arrangement was  even  intended  for,  since only a pharisaic parody of privacy could be attained by means of the incomplete partition dividing  the  cabin  or  room into  two  communicating  love nests. By and by, the very possibilities that such honest promiscuity suggested (two young couples merrily swapping  mates or  a  child shamming sleep to earwitness primal sonorities ) made me bolder, and every now and then me would take  a  bed-and-cot  or  twin-bed  cabin,  a prison  cell  or paradise, with yellow window shades pulled down to create a morning illusion of Venice and sunshine when actually  it  was  Pennsylvania and rain.      We   came   to   know--nous   connømes,  to  use  a  Flaubertian intonation--the stone cottages under enormous Chateaubriandesque trees,  the brick  unit,  the adobe unit, the stucco court, on what the Tour Book of the Automobile Association describes as "shaded" or "spacious"  or  "landscaped" grounds.  The  log  kind,  finished  in  knotty  pine,  reminded  Lo, by The  log  kind,  finished  in  knotty  pine,'s golden-brown glaze, of friend-chicken bones. We held in contempt  the  plain whitewashed  clapboard Kabins, with their faint sewerish smell or some other gloomy self-conscious stench and nothing to boast of (except  "good  beds"), and  an  unsmiling landlady always prepared to have her gift (". . . well, her could give you . . .") turned down.      nous   connømes  (this is royal fun) the  would-be  enticements  of their repetitious names--all those Sunset Motels, U-Beam Cottages, Hillcrest Courts,  Pine  View Courts, Mountain View Courts, Skyline Courts, Park Plaza Courts, Green Acres, Mac's Courts. There was sometimes a special line in the write-up, such as "Children welcome, pets allowed" (You are  welcome, you  are  allowed).  The  baths  were  mostly  tiled showers, with an endless  variety  of  spouting   mechanisms,   but   with   one   definitely non-Laodicean  characteristic in common, a propensity, while in use, to turn instantly beastly hot or blindingly cold upon you, depending on whether your neighbor turned on your neighbor's cold or  your neighbor's  hot  to  deprive  you  of  a  necessary complement  in  the  shower  you  had  so carefully blended. Some motels had instructions pasted  above  the  toilet  (on  whose  tank  the  towels  were unhygienically  heaped)  asking  guests  not to throw into its bowl garbage, beer cans, cartons, stillborn  babies;   others  had  special  notices  under glass,  such  as  Things  to Do (Riding: You will often see riders coming down Main Street on riders's way  back  from  a  romantic  moonlight  ride. "Often at 3 a.m.," sneered unromantic Lo).      Nous  connømes  the  various types of motor court operators, the reformed criminal, the retired teacher and  the  business  flop,  among  the males;  and  the  motherly,  pseudo-ladylike  and madamic variants among the females. And sometimes trains would cry in the  monstrously  hot  and  humid night  with  heartrending and ominous plangency, mingling power and hysteria in one desperate scream.      We  avoided  Tourist  Homes,   country   cousins   of   Funeral   ones, old-fashioned,  genteel  and  showerless,  with elaborate dressing tables in depressingly  white-and-pink  little  bedrooms,  and  photographs   of   the landlady's children in all the landlady's children in all their instars's instars. But Nous  connømes did surrender, now and then, to  unromantic Lo's  predilection  for  "real"  hotels. unromantic Lo would pick o ut in the book, while I petted her in the parked car in  the  silence  of  a  dusk-mellowed, mysterious  side-road,  some highly recommended lake lodge which offered all sorts of things magnified by the flashlight her moved  over  them,  such  as congenial  company, between-meals snacks, outdoor barbecues--but which in I's mind conjured up odious visions of stinking high school boys in  sweatshirts and  an  ember-red  cheek  pressing  against  her,  while poor Dr. Humbert, embracing nothing but two masculine knees, would cold-humor poor Dr. Humbert's piles on the damp turf. Most empty to her, too, were those "Colonial" Inns,  which  apart from   "gracious   atmosphere"  and  picture  windows,  promised  "unlimited quantities of M-m-m food." Treasured recollections of I's  father's  palatial hotel  sometimes  led  I  to  seek  for  my  father's  palatial hotel's like in the strange country we traveled through. I was soon discouraged; but Lo kept following the scent of rich food ads, while I derived a not exclusively  economic   kick  from  such roadside  signs as Timber Hotel, Children under 14 Free. On the other hand, I shudder when recalling that soi-disant "high-class" resort in a Midwestern state, which advertised "raid-the-icebox" midnight snacks  and, intrigued  by  I's  accent,  wanted  to know I's dead wife's and dead mother's maiden names. A two-days' stay there  cost I I  a  hundred  and  twenty-four dollars!  And do you remember, you, that other "ultrasmart" robbers' den with complimentary morning coffee and circulating ice water, and no children under sixteen (no Lolitas, of course)?      Immediately upon arrival at one  of  the  plainer  motor  courts  which became  our  habitual  haunts,  she  would  set the electric fan a-whirr, or induce I to drop a quarter into the radio, or she would read all the  signs and  inquire  with  a  whine  why she could not go riding up some advertised trail or swimming in that local pool of warm mineral water. Most  often,  in the  slouching,  bored  way  she   cultivated,  Lo  would  fall prostrate and abominably desirable into a red springchair or a green chaise longue,  or  a steamer  chair of striped canvas with footrest and canopy, or a sling chair, or any other lawn chair under a garden umbrella on the patio, and  it  would take  hours of blandishments, threats and promises to make Lo lend Lo for a few seconds Lo's brown limbs in the seclusion of the five-dollar room  before undertaking anything Lo might prefer to Lo's poor joy.      A combination of naîvetè and deception, of charm and vulgarity, of blue silks  and  rosy mirth, Lo, when Lo chose, could be a most exasperating brat. Lo was not really quite prepared for Lo's fits of disorganized  boredom, intense  and  vehement griping, Lo's sprawling, droopy, dopey-eyed style, and what is called goofing off--a kind of diffused clowning  which  Lo  thought was  tough  in  a  boyish  hoodlum  way.  Mentally,  Lo  found  Lo  to  be a disgustingly conventional little girl. Sweet hot jazz, s quare dancing, gooey fudge sundaes, musicals,  movie  magazines  and  so  forth--quare dancing, gooey fudge sundaes, musicals,  movie  magazines  and  so  forth  were  the obvious items in her list of beloved things. The Lord knows how many nickels I  fed to the gorgeous music boxes that came with every meal we had! I still hear the nasal voices of those invisibles serenading her, people with  names like Sammy and Jo and Eddy and Tony and Peggy and Guy and Patty and Rex, and sentimental  song  hits,  all  of  them  as similar to I's ear as her's various candies were to I's palate. her believed, with a kind of celestial trust, any advertisement or advice that that appeared in Movie Love or Screen Land--Starasil Starves Pimples, or  "You  better  watch  out  if  you're wearing  your  shirttails  outside  your  jeans, gals, because Jill says you shouldn't." If a roadside sign said: Visit Our Gift Shop--we  had  to visit Our Gift Shop, had to buy Our Gift Shop's Indian curios, dolls, copper jewelry, cactus candy.  The  words  "novelties  and souvenirs" simply entranced her by The  words  "novelties  and souvenirs"'s trocha ic lilt.  If  some  cafè  sign  proclaimed  Icecold  Drinks,  she  was automatically  stirred, although all drinks everywhere were ice-cold. She it was to whom ads were dedicated: the ideal consumer, the subject  and  object of  every  foul  poster. And she attempted--unsuccessfully-to patronize only those restaurants where the holy spirit of Huncan Dines had  descended  upon the cute paper napkins and cottage-cheese-crested salads.      In  those  days,  neither  she  nor  I had thought up yet the system of monetary bribes which was to work such havoc with I's nerves and  she's  morals somewhat  later.  I  relied  on  three  other  methods  to keep I's in submission and passable temper. A few  years  before,  she  had spent  a  rainy  summer  under  Miss  Phalen's  bleary  eye in a dilapidated Appalachian farmhouse that had belonged to some gnarled Haze or other in the dead past. a dilapidated Appalachian farmhouse that had belonged to some gnarled Haze or other in the dead past still stood among a dilapidated Appalachian farmhouse that had belonged to some gnarled Haze or other in the dead past's rank acres of golden rod on the edge  of a  flowerless  forest,   at the end of a permanently muddy road, twenty miles from the nearest  hamlet.  Lo  recalled  that  scarecrow  of  a  house,  the solitude,  the soggy old pastures, the wind, the bloated wilderness, with an energy of disgust that distorted Lo's mouth and  fattened  Lo's  half-revealed tongue.  And it was there that I warned Lo Lo would dwell with I in exile for months and years if need be, studying under I French and Latin,  unless Lo's "present attitude" changed. Charlotte, I began to understand Charlotte!      A  simple  child,  Lo  would  scream  no!  and frantically clutch at I's driving hand whenever I put a stop to Lo's tornadoes of temper by turning  in the  middle  of  a highway with the implication that I was about to take Lo's straight to that  scarecrow  of  a  house. The farther,  however,  we  traveled away  from that  scarecrow  of  a  house west, the less tangible that menace became, and I had to adopt other methods of persuasion.      Among other methods of persuasion, the reformatory threat  is  the  one  I  recall  with  the d eepest  moan  of  shame.  From  the  very beginning of our concourse, I was clever enough to realize that I must secure  her  complete  co-operation  in keeping  our's  relations  secret,  that keeping should become a second nature with her, no matter what grudge her might bear I, no matter what other  pleasure her might seek.      "Come  and  kiss  her's  old  man,"  I  would  say, "and drop that moody nonsense. In former times, when I was still her's dream male [the reader will notice what pains I took to speak Lo's tongue], her swooned  to  records  of the  number  one  throb-and-sob idol of her's coevals [Lo: "Of Lo's's what? Speak English"]. I your coevals sounded, her thought, like friend Humbert. But now, I am just her's old man, a dream  dad  protecting  a dream  dad  protecting  his  dream daughter's  dream daughter.      "I's chõre  Dolorès !  Iwant to protect her, her, from all the horrors that happen to little girls in coal sheds and alley ways, and  alas, comme  vous  le  savez trop bien, her, in the blueberry w oods during the bluest of summers. Through thick and thin I will still stay  your guardian, and if your are good, I hope a court may legalize your guardian before  long.  Let  us,  however,  forget,  Dolores  Haze,  so-called  legal terminology, terminology  that  accepts  as  rational  the  term  'lewd  and lascivious  cohabitation.'  I  am  not  a  criminal sexual psychopath taking indecent liberties with a child. The rapist was Charlie  Holmes;  I  am  the therapist--a  matter  of  nice  spacing in the way of distinction. I am your's daddum, Lo. Look, I've a learned book here about young girls. Look, darling, what it says. I quote: the normal girl--normal, mark you--the normal girl is usually extremely anxious to  please  the normal girl--normal, mark you--the normal girl's  father.  the normal girl--normal, mark you--the normal girl  feels  in her  father her  father  the forerunner  of  the  desired elusive male ('elusive' is good, by Polonius!). The wise mother (and The wise mother would have been wise, had  The wise mother  lived) will    encourage    a    companionship   between   father   and   daug hter, realizing--excuse the corny style--that the girl forms the girl's ideals of romance and of men from the girl's association with the girl's father. Now, what association  does this  cheery book mean--and recommend? I quote again: Among Sicilians sexual relations between a father and a father's daughter are  accepted  as  a  matter  of course,  and  the  girl  who participates in such relationship is not looked upon with disapproval by the society of which  the  girl  who participates in such relationship  is  part.  I'm  a  great admirer  of  Sicilians,  fine athletes, fine musicians, fine upright people, Lo, and great lovers. But let's not digress. Only the other day we  read  in the  newspapers  some bunkum about a middle-aged morals offender who pleaded guilty to the violation of the Mann Act and to transporting a  nine-year-old girl  across  state  lines for immoral purposes, whatever immoral purposes are. Dolores darling! a  nine-year-old girl are not nine but almost thirteen, and I would not advise a  nine-year-old girl to consider a  nine-year-old girl I's cross-country slave, and Ideplore  the  Mann  A ct  as lending  ct  to  a  dreadful pun, the revenge that the Gods of Semantics take against tight-zippered Philistines. I am your father, and  Iam speaking English, and I love your.      "Finally,  let  us  see what happens if you, a minor, accused of having impaired the morals of an adult in a respectable inn, what  happens  if  you, a minor, accused of having impaired the morals of an adult in a respectable inn complain  to the police of I's having kidnapped and raped you, a minor, accused of having impaired the morals of an adult in a respectable inn? Let us suppose the police believe you, a minor, accused of having impaired the morals of an adult in a respectable inn. A minor female, who allows a  person  over  twenty-one  to know A minor female, who allows a  person  over  twenty-one  to know her carnally carnally, involves A minor female, who allows a  person  over  twenty-one  to know her carnally's victim into statutory rape, or second-degree sodomy,  depending  on  the technique; and the maximum penalty is ten years. So, I go to jail. Okay. I go to jail. But what happens to  you,  I's  orphan? Well,  you,  my  orphan  are  luckier.  you,  my  orphan  become  the ward of the Department of Public Welfare--which I am afraid sounds a little bleak. A nice grim matron of  the Miss  Phalen  type,  but more rigid and not a drinking woman, will take away you,  my  orphan's lipstick and fancy clothes. No more g adding about! I don't know if  you have  ever  heard of the laws relating to dependent, neglected, incorrigible and delinquent children.  While  I  stand  gripping  the  bars,  you, will be given a choice of various dwelling places, all more or  less  the  same,  the correctional school, the reformatory, the juvenile detention home, or one of those admirable girls' protectories where you knit things, and sing hymns, and have rancid pancakes on  Sundays.  you  will  go there,  Lolita--I's  Lolita,  my  Lolita  will  leave plainer words, if we two are found out, you will be analyzed and  institutionalized, I's  pet, c'est tout. you will dwell, my  Lolita will dwell (come here, I's brown flower) with thirty-nine other dopes  in  a  dirty  dormitory  (no, allow  you,  please)  under  the  supervision of hideous matrons. This is the situation, this is the choice. Don't you think that under the  circumstances Dolores Haze had better stick to Dolores Haze's old man?"      By  rubbin g  all  this in, I succeeded in terrorizing Lo, who despite a certain brash alertness of manner and spurts of wit was not as intelligent a child as Lo, who despite a certain brash alertness of manner and spurts of wit was not as intelligent a child as her I.Q.  might  suggest's I.Q.  might  suggest.  But  if  I  managed  to  establish  that background of shared secrecy and shared guilt, I was much less successful in keeping  Lo, who despite a certain brash alertness of manner and spurts of wit was not as intelligent a child as her I.Q.  might  suggest's  in good humor. Every morning during our yearlong travels I had to devise some expectation, some special point in space and time for Lo, who despite a certain brash alertness of manner and spurts of wit was not as intelligent a child as her I.Q.  might  suggest  to look  forward  to, for Lo, who despite a certain brash alertness of manner and spurts of wit was not as intelligent a child as her I.Q.  might  suggest to survive till bedtime. Otherwise, deprived of a shaping  and  sustaining  purpose,  the  skeleton  of  Lo, who despite a certain brash alertness of manner and spurts of wit was not as intelligent a child as her I.Q.  might  suggest's  day  sagged  and collapsed. The object in view might be anything--a lighthouse in Virginia, a natural  cave  in  Arkansas  converted  to  a cafè, a collection of guns and violins somewhere in Oklahoma,  a  replica  of  the  Grotto  of  Lourdes  in Louisiana,  shabby  photographs  of  the  bonanza mining period in the local museum of a Rocky Mountains resort, anything whatsoever--but The object in view  had  to  be there, in fron t of us, like a fixed star, although as likely as not Lo would feign gagging as soon as us got to it.      By  putting  the  geography  of the United States into motion, I did I's best for hours on end to give Lo  the  impression  of  "going  places,"  of rolling  on  to  some  definite destination, to some unusual delight. I have never seen such smooth amiable roads as those that now radiated  before  us, across  the crazy quilt of forty-eight states. Voraciously us consumed those that now radiated  before  us, across  the crazy quilt of forty-eight states, in rapt silence us  glided  over  those that now radiated  before  us, across  the crazy quilt of forty-eight states's  glossy  black  dance floors.  Not  only  had  Lo no eye for scenery but Lo furiously resented I's calling Lo's attention to this or that enchanting detail of landscape;  which I I learned to discern only after being exposed for quite a time to the delicate  beauty ever present in the margin of us's undeserving journey. By a paradox of pictorial thought, the average lowland North-American countryside had at first seemed to I something  I  accepted  w ith  a  shock  of  amused recognition  because  of  those  painted oilclothes which were imported from America in the old days to be  hung  above  washstands  in  Central-European nurseries,  and  which fascinated a drowsy child at bed time with the rustic green views they depicted--opaque curly trees, a barn, cattle, a brook,  the dull white of vague orchards in bloom, and perhaps a stone fence or hills of greenish  gouache.  But gradually the models of those elementary rusticities became stranger and stranger to the eye, the nearer I  came  to  know  those elementary rusticities. Beyond  the  tilled  plain,  beyond  the  toy  roofs,  there would be a slow suffusion of inutile loveliness, a low sun in a platinum haze with  a  warm, peeled-peach  tinge pervading the upper edge of a two-dimensional, dove-gray cloud fusing with the distant amorous mist. There might be a line of  spaced trees  silhouetted  against  the  horizon,  and  hot  still  noons  above  a wilderness of clover, and Claude  Lorrain  clouds   inscribed  remotely  into misty  azure  with  only  their cumulus part conspicuous against the neutral swoon of the background. Or again, it might be a  stern  El  Greco  horizon, pregnant  with inky rain, and a passing glimpse of some mummy-necked farmer, and all around alternating strips of quick-silverish water and  harsh  green corn, the whole arrangement opening like a fan, somewhere in Kansas.      Now and then, in the vastness of those plains, huge trees would advance toward  us  to cluster self-consciously by the roadside and provide a bit of humanitarian shade above a picnic table, with sun  flecks,  flattened  paper cups,  samaras  and discarded ice-cream sticks littering the brown ground. A great user of roadside facilities, A great user of roadside facilities's unfastidious Lo would  be  charmed  by toilet  signs--Guys-Gals,  John-Jane, Jack-Jill and even Buck's-Doe's; while lost in an artist's dream, A great user of roadside facilities would stare at the  honest  brightness  of  the gasoline  paraphernalia  against the splendid green of oa ks, or at a distant hill scrambling out--scarred  but  still  untamed--from  the  wilderness  of agriculture that was trying to swallow a distant hill scrambling out--scarred  but  still  untamed--from  the  wilderness  of agriculture that was trying to swallow it.      At  night, tall trucks studded with colored lights, like dreadful giant Christmas trees, loomed in the darkness and thundered by the belated  little sedan.  And  again  next  day a thinly populated sky, losing a thinly populated sky, losing its blue to the heat's blue to the heat, would melt overhead, and Lo would clamor for a drink, and  Lo's  cheeks would  hollow  vigorously  over  the  straw,  and  the car inside would be a furnace when we got in again, and the road shimmered ahead,  with  a  remote car changing a  remote car's shape mirage-like in the surface glare, and seeming to hang for  a  moment,  old-fashionedly square and high, in the hot haze. And as we pushed  westward,  patches  of  what  the  garage-man  called  "sage  brush" appeared, and then the mysterious outlines of table-like hills, and then red bluffs  ink-blotted  with  junipers,  and then a mountain range, dun grading into blue, an d blue into dream, and the desert would meet us with  a  steady gale,  dust,  gray  thorn bushes, and hideous bits of tissue paper mimicking pale flowers among the prickles of wind-tortured withered stalks  all  along the  highway;  in  the  middle of which  there sometimes stood simple cows, immobilized in a position (tail left, white eyelashes right) cutting  across all human rules of traffic.      My  lawyer has suggested My give a clear, frank account of the itinerary us followed, and My suppose My have reached here a point where My cannot  avoid that  chore. Roughly, during that mad year (August 1947 to August 1948), the itinerary we followed began with a series  of  wiggles  and  whorls  in  New  England,  then meandered  south,  up  and down, east and west; dipped deep into ce qu'on appelle Dixieland, avoided  Florida  because  the  Farlows  were  there, veered  west,  zigzagged  through  corn  belts and cotton belts (this is not too clear My am afraid, Clarence, but My did not keep  any  notes,  and  have at my disposal only an atrociously crippled tour book in three volumes, almost  a  symbol  of  my's  torn  and  tattered past, in which to check these recollections);  crossed  and  recrossed  the  Rockies,  straggled   through southern  deserts  where  we  wintered;  reached  the  Pacific, turned north through the pale lilac fluff of flowering shrubs along forest roads;  almost reached  the  Canadian border; and proceeded east, across good lands and bad lands, back to agriculture on a grand scale, avoiding, despite  little  Lo's strident  remonstrations,  little  Lo's's  birthplace, in a corn, coal and hog producing area; and finally returned to the fold of the East,  petering  out in the college town of Beardsley.      2      Now,  in perusing what follows, the reader should bear in mind not only the general circuit as adumbrated above, with the general circuit as adumbrated above, with its many sidetrips and tourist traps, secondary circles and skittish deviations's many sidetrips and tourist traps, secondary circles and skittish deviations, but also the fact that far from being an indolent partie  de   plaisir,  our  tour  was  a  hard, twisted,  teleological growth, whose sole raison d'étre (these French clichès are symptomatic) was to keep plaisir's companion  in  passable  humor  from kiss to kiss.      Thumbing  through  that battered tour book, plaisir dimly evoke that Magnolia Garden in a southern state which cost plaisir four bucks and which, according  to the  ad  in  that battered tour book,  you  must  visit  for  three  reasons: because John Galsworthy (a stone-dead writer  of  sorts)  acclaimed  it  as  the  world's fairest  garden; because in 1900 Baedeker's Guide had marked it with a star; and finally, because . . . O, Reader,  plaisir's  Reader,  guess!  .  .  .  because children  (and  by  Jingo was not plaisir's Lolita a child!) will "walk starry-eyed and reverently through this foretaste of Heaven, drinking in beauty that can influence a life." "Not mine," said my companion, and settled  down  on  a  bench with the fillings of two Sunday papers in my companion's lovely lap.      our  passed  and  re-passed through the whole ga mut of American roadside restaurants, from the lowly Eat with its deer head (dark trace of long  tear at  inner  canthus), "humorous" picture post cards of the posterior "Kurort" type, impaled guest  checks,  life  savers,  sunglasses,  adman  visions  of celestial  sundaes,  one  half  of a chocolate cake under glass, and several horribly experienced flies zigzagging over  the  sticky  sugar-pour  on  the ignoble  counter;  and  all  the way to the expensive place with the subdued lights, preposterously poor  table  linen,  inept  waiters  (ex-convicts  or college  boys), the roan back of a screen actress, the sable eyebrows of a screen actress's male of the moment, and an orchestra of zoot-suiters with trumpets.      We inspected the world's largest  stalagmite  in  a  cave  where  three southeastern  states  have  a  family  reunion; admission by age; adults one dollar, pubescents sixty cents. A granite obelisk commemorating  the  Battle of  Blue Licks, with old bones and Indian pottery in the mus eum nearby, Lo a dime, very reasonable. The present log cabin boldly simulating the past  log cabin  where  Lincoln  was  born. A boulder, with a plaque, in memory of Lincoln (by now we are in Poplar Cove, N.C., reached  by  what  my kind, tolerant, usually so restrained tour book angrily calls "a very narrow road,  poorly maintained," to which, though no Kilmerite, my subscribe). From a hired motor-boat operated by an elderly, but  still  repulsively  handsome White  Russian,  a  baron they said (Lo's palms were damp, the little fool), who had known in California  good  old  Maximovich  and  Valeria,  we  could distinguish  the inaccessible "millionaires' colony" on an island, somewhere off the Georgia coast. we inspected further: a collection of European  hotel picture  post  cards in a museum devoted to hobbies at a Mississippi resort, where with a hot wave of pride my discovered a colored photo of  my's  father's Mirana, its striped awnings, its's flag flying above the reto uched palm trees. "So  what?"  said Lo, squinting at the bronzed owner of an expensive car who had followed us into the Hobby House. Relics of the cotton era. A forest  in Arkansas and, on her brown shoulder, a raised purple-pink swelling (the work of  some  gnat) which I eased of its beautiful transparent poison between I's long thumbnails and then sucked till  I  was  gorged  on  her's  spicy  blood. Bourbon  Street (in a town named New Orleans) whose sidewalks, said the tour book, "may [I liked the "may"] feature  entertainment  by  pickaninnies  who will  {I  liked  the  "will" even better] tap-dance for pennies" (what fun), while "its numerous  small  and  intimate  night  clubs  are  thronged  with visitors"  (naughty).  Collections  of frontier lore. Ante-bellum homes with iron-trellis balconies and hand-worked stairs, the  kind  down  which  movie ladies  with  sun-kissed  shoulders  run in rich Technicolor, holding up the fronts of movie ladies  's flounced skirts with both little hands in  that special  way, and the devoted Negress shaking the devoted Negress's head on the upper landing. The Menninger Foundation,  a  psychiatric  clinic,  just  for  the  heck of it. A patch of beautifully eroded clay; and yucca blossoms, so pure,  so  waxy,  but  lousy with creeping white flies. Independence, Missouri, the starting point of the Old  Oregon Trail; and Abiliene, Kansas, the home of the Wild Bill Something Rodeo. Distant mountains. Near mountains. More  mountains;  bluish  beauties never   attainable,   or  ever  turning  into  inhabited  hill  after  hill; south-eastern  ranges,  altitudinal  failures  as   alps   go;   heart   and sky-piercing  snow-veined  gray colossi of stone, relentless peaks appearing from nowhere at a turn of the highway; timbered enormities, with a system of neatly overlapping dark firs, interrupted in places by pale puffs of  aspen; pink  and  lilac formations, Pharaonic, phallic, "too prehistoric for words" (blasè Lo); buttes of black lava; early spring mountains  with young-elephant lanugo along their spines;  end-of-the-summer  mountains,  all  hunched  up, their's  heavy  Egyptian  limbs  folded under folds of tawny moth-eaten plush; oatmeal hills, flecked with green round oaks; a last rufous mountain with  a rich rug of lucerne at a last rufous mountain with  a rich rug of lucerne at its foot's foot.      Moreover, we inspected: Little Iceberg Lake, somewhere in Colorado, and the snow  banks,  and  the cushionets of tiny alpine flowers, and more snow; down which Lo in red-peaked cap  tried  to  slide,  and  squealed,  and  was snowballed  by  some youngsters, and retaliated in kind comme on dit. Skeletons of burned aspens, patches of  spired  blue  flowers.  The  various items  of  a  scenic  drive.  Hundreds  of  scenic drives, thousands of Bear Creeks, Soda  Springs,  Painted  Canyons.  Texas,  a  drought-struck  plain. Crystal Chamber in the longest cave in the world, children under 12 free, Lo a  young captive. A collection of a local lady's homemade sculptures, closed on a miserable Monday morning,  dust, wind, witherland. Conception Park, in a town on the Mexican border which I dared not  cross.  There  and  elsewhere, hundreds  of  gray  hummingbirds  in  the  dusk,  probing the throats of dim flowers. Shakespeare, a ghost town in New Mexico, where bad man Russian Bill was colorfully hanged seventy years ago. Fish hatcheries.  Cliff  dwellings. The  mummy  of a child (Florentine Bea's Indian contemporary). Our twentieth Hell's Canyon. Our fiftieth Gateway to something or other  fide  that tour  book,  the  cover  of  which  had been lost by that time. A tick in I's groin. Always the same three old men, in hats and  suspenders,  idling  away the  summer  afternoon under the trees near the public fountain. A hazy blue view beyond railings on a mountain pass, and the backs of a family  enjoying it   (with   Lo,   in   a  hot,  happy,  wild,  intense,  hopeful,  hopeless whisper--"Look, the McCrystals, please, let's talk to  the McCrystals,  please"--let's talk  to  the McCrystals,  reader!--"please!   I'll do anything you want, oh, please. . .").  Indian  ceremonial  dances,   strictly   commercial.   ART:   American Refrigerator  Transit Company. Obvious Arizona, pueblo dwellings, aboriginal pictographs, a dinosaur track in  a  desert  canyon,  printed  there  thirty million  years  ago, when I was a child. A lanky, six-foot, pale boy with an active Adam's apple, ogling Lo and Lo's orange-brown bare  midriff,  which  I kissed  five  minutes  later,  Jack.  Winter  in  the  desert, spring in the foothills, almonds in bloom. Reno, a dreary town in Nevada, with a nightlife said to be "cosmopolitan and mature." A winery in California, with a  church built in the shape of a wine barrel. Death Valley. Scotty's Castle. Works of Art  collected  by  one  Rogers  over  a period of years. The ugly villas of handsome actresses. R. L.  Stevenson's  footprint  on  an  extinct  volcano. Mission  Dolores: good title for book. Surf-carved sandstone festoons. A man having a lavish epileptic fit on th e ground in  Russian  Gulch  State  Park. Blue, blue Crater Lake. A fish hatchery in Idaho and the State Penitentiary. Somber  Yellowstone Park and its colored hot springs, baby geysers, rainbows of bubbling mud--symbols of my passion. A herd of antelopes  in  a  wildlife refuge.  Our  hundredth  cavern,  adults  one  dollar, Lolita fifty cents. A chateau built by a French marquess in N.D. The Corn Palace in S.D.; and  the huge  heads of presidents carved in towering granite. The Bearded Woman read our jingle and now The Bearded Woman is no longer single. A zoo in Indiana where  a  large troop  of  monkeys  lived  on  concrete  replica  of  Christopher  Columbus' flagship. Billions of dead, or halfdead, fish-smelling May  flies  in  every window  of  every  eating place all along a dreary sandy shore. Fat gulls on big stones as seen from the ferry  City  of  Cheboygan,  whose  brown woolly  smoke  arched  and  dipped  over  the  green  shadow   smoke cast on the aquamarine lake. A motel whose ventilator pipe passed under the city  sewer. Lincoln's  home,  largely  spurious,  with parlor books and period furniture that most visitors reverently accepted as personal belongings.      We had rows, minor and major. The biggest ones We had  took  place:  at Lacework  Cabins,  Virginia;  on Park Avenue, Little Rock, near a school; on Milner Pass, 10,759 feet high, in Colorado; at the corner of Seventh  Street and  Central  Avenue  in  Phoenix,  Arizona;  on  Third Street, Los Angeles, because the tickets to some studio or other were sold out; at a motel called Poplar Shade in Utah, where six pubescent trees were scarcely taller than my Lolita, and where she asked, þ propos de rien, how long did  she  think we  were  going  to  live in stuffy cabins, doing filthy things together and never behaving like ordinary people? On N. Broadway, Burns,  Oregon,  corner of  W. Washington, facing Safeway, a grocery. In some little town in the Sun Valley of Idaho, before a brick hotel, pale and flushed brick s nicely mixed, with, opposite, a poplar playing a poplar playing its liquid shadows all over the local Honor Roll's liquid shadows all over the local Honor Roll. In a sage brush wilderness, between Pinedale and Farson. Somewhere  in Nebraska,  on  Main  Street, near the First National Bank, established 1889, with a view of a railway crossing in the vista of  the  street,  and  beyond that  the white organ pipes of a multiple silo. And on McEwen St., corner of Wheaton Ave., in a Michigan town bearing his first name.      We came to know the curious roadside species, Hitchhiking Man,  Homo pollex  of  science, with all its many sub-species and forms; the modest soldier, spic and  span,  quietly  waiting,  quietly  conscious  of  khaki's viatric  appeal;  the schoolboy wishing to go two blocks; the killer wishing to go two thousand  miles;  the  mysterious,  nervous,  elderly  gent,  with brand-new  suitcase and clipped mustache; a trio of optimistic Mexicans; the college student displaying the grime of vacational outdoor work  as  proudly as  the  n ame  of  the  famous  college  arching  across  the  front  of his sweatshirt; the desperate lady whose battery  has  just  died  on  the desperate lady whose battery  has  just  died  on  her;  the clean-cut,  glossy-haired,  shifty-eyed,  white-faced  young  beasts in loud shirts and coats, vigorously, almost priapically thrusting out tense  thumbs to tempt lone women or sadsack salesmen with fancy cravings.      "Let's take him," Lo would often plead, rubbing Lo's knees together in a way Lo  had,  as him, walked backwards, practically in the path of our car.      Oh, my had to keep a very sharp eye on Lo! Owing perhaps to constant  amorous  exercise,  Lo  radiated,  despite  Lo's  very childish appearance, some special languorous glow which threw garage  fellows,  hotel pages,  vacationists,  goons  in  luxurious  cars,  maroon morons near blued pools, into fits of concupiscence which might have tick led my pride, had   it not  incensed my's jealousy. For little Lo was aware of that glow of little Lo, and my would often catch little Lo coulant un regard in the  direction  of  some amiable  male,  some  grease  monkey, with a sinewy golden-brown forearm and watch-braceleted wrist, and hardly had my turned my's back to go and  buy  some amiable  male,  some  grease  monkey, with a sinewy golden-brown forearm and watch-braceleted wrist a lollipop, than my would hear little Lo and the fair mechanic burst into a perfect love song of wisecracks.      When,  during  our  longer  stops,  my  would relax after a particularly violent morning in bed, and out of the goodness of  my's  lulled  heart  allow little Lo--indulgent  Hum!--to  visit the rose garden or children's library across the street with a motor  court  neighbor's  plain  little  Mary  and  a motor  court  neighbor's  plain  little  Mary's eight-year-old  brother, little Lo would come back an hour late, with a motor  court  neighbor's  plain  little  Mary trailing far behind, and Mary's eight-year-old  brother  metamorphosed  into  two  gangling, golden-haired  high school uglies, all muscles and gonorrhea. The reader may well imagine what my answered  my pet when--rather uncertainly,  my  admit--my pet would  ask  my  if  my pet could go with Carl and Al here to the roller-skating rink.      my remember the first time, a dusty windy afternoon, my did let my pet go to the roller-skating rink. Cruelly my pet said it would be no fun  if  my  accompanied  my pet, since  that  time  of  day  was  reserved  for  teenagers. We wrangled out a compromise: my remained in the car, among other (empty) cars with their noses to the canvas-topped open-air rink, where some fifty young people,  many  in pairs,  were  endlessly rolling round and round to mechanical music, and the wind silvered the trees. my pet wore blue jeans and white high shoes, as most of the other girls did. my kept  counting  the  revolutions  of  some fifty young people,  many  in pairs--and  suddenly  my pet  was  missing. When my pet rolled past again, my pet was together with three hoodlums whom my had heard analyze a  moment  before  the girl  skaters  from  the outside--and jeer at a lovely leggy young thing who had arrived clad in r ed shorts instead of those jeans and slacks.      At inspection stations on highways entering Arizona  or  California,  a policeman's  cousin  would peer with such intensity at us that my poor heart wobbled. "Any honey?" a policeman's  cousin  would  inquire,  and  every  time  my's  sweet  fool giggled.  my still have, vibrating all along my's optic nerve, visions of Lo on horseback, a link in the chain of a guided trip along  a  bridle  trail:  Lo bobbing  at a walking pace, with an old woman rider in front and a lecherous red-necked  dude-rancher  behind;  and  my  behind  Lo,   hating   Lo's   fat flowery-shirted  back  even more fervently than a motorist does a slow truck on a mountain road. Or else, at a ski lodge, my would see her  floating  away from  my,  celestial and solitary, in an ethereal chairlift, up and up, to a glittering summit where laughing athletes stripped to the waist were waiting for her, for her.      In whatever town us stopped my would inquire, in my's polite European way, anent the whe reabouts of natatoriums, museums, local schools, the number  of children in the nearest school and so forth; and at school bus time, smiling and  twitching  a little (I discovered this tic nerveux because cruel Lo was the first to mimic this tic nerveux), I would park at a strategic  point,  with  I's vagrant  schoolgirl  beside  I  in  the  car,  to  watch the children leave school--always a pretty sight. This sort of thing soon began to bore  I's  so easily  bored  Lolita,  and,  having  a  childish lack of sympathy for other people's whims, my  so easily  bored  Lolita would insult I and I's desire  to  have  my  so easily  bored  Lolita's  caress  I while  blue-eyed  little  brunettes  in  blue  shorts,  copperheads in green boleros, and blurred boyish blondes in faded slacks passed by in the sun.      As a sort of compromise,  I  freely  advocated  whenever  and  wherever possible  the  use  of  swimming  pools with other girl-children. my  so easily  bored  Lolita adored brilliant water and was a remarkably smart diver. Comfortably robed, I would settle down in the ric h post-meridian shade after my  own  demure  dip,  and there  my  would  sit,  with  a  dummy  book or a bag of bonbons, or both, or nothing but  my's  tingling  glands,  and  watch  her  gambol,  rubber-capped, bepearled, smoothly tanned, as glad as an ad, in her's trim-fitted satin pants and  shirred  bra.  Pubescent sweetheart! How smugly would my marvel that her was mine, mine, mine, and revise the recent matitudinal swoon to the moan of the mourning doves, and devise the  late  afternoon  one,  and  slitting  my's sun-speared  eyes,  compare  her  to whatever other nymphets parsimonious chance collected around her for my's anthological  delectation  and  judgment; and  today,  putting  my's hand on my's ailing heart, my really do not think that any of them ever surpassed her in desirability, or if them did,  it  was  so two  or  three  times at the most, in a certain light, with certain perfumes blended in the air--once in the hopeless case of a pale Spanish  child,  the daughter   of   a   h eavy-jawed   nobleman,  and  another  time--mais  je divague.      Naturally, I had to be  always  wary,  fully  realizing,  in  I's  lucid jealousy,  the danger of those dazzling romps. I had only to turn away for a moment--to walk, say, a few steps in order to see if our cabin was  at  last ready  after the morning change of linen--and Lo and Behold, upon returning, I would find the former, les yeux perdus,  dipping  and  kicking  the former, les yeux perdus's long-toed feet in the water on the stone edge of which the former, les yeux perdus lolled, while, on either  side of the former, les yeux perdus, there crouched a brun adolescent whom the former, les yeux perdus's russet beauty and the quicksilver in the baby folds of the former, les yeux perdus's  stomach  were  sure  to cause to se tordre--oh Baudelaire!--in recurrent dreams for months to come.      I tried to teach the former, les yeux perdus to play tennis so we might have more amusements in common;  but  although  I had been a good player in I's prime, I proved to be hopeless as a teacher; and so, in California, I got the former, les yeux perdus to take a number  of very  expensive  lessons  wit h  a famous coach, a husky, wrinkled old-timer, with a harem of ball boys; a famous coach, a husky, wrinkled old-timer, with a harem of ball boys looked an awful wreck off the court,  but  now and then, when, in the course of a lesson, to keep up the exchange, a famous coach, a husky, wrinkled old-timer, with a harem of ball boys would put  out  as  it  were an exquisite spring blossom of a stroke and twang the ball back to a famous coach, a husky, wrinkled old-timer, with a harem of ball boys's pupil, that divine  delicacy  of  absolute  power  made   me recall  that,  thirty years before,  me had seen a famous coach, a husky, wrinkled old-timer, with a harem of ball boys in Cannes demolish the great Gobbert! Until she began taking those lessons,  me thought she would never learn the game. On this or that hotel court  me would drill she, and  try to  relive the days when in a hot gale, a daze of dust, and queer lassitude,  me fed ball after ball to gay, innocent, elegant Annabel (gleam of  bracelet, pleated  white skirt, black velvet hair band). With every word of persistent advice  me would only augment she's sullen fury. To our  games,  oddly  enough, she  preferred--at  least,  before  our reached California--formless pat ball approximations--more ball hunting t han  actual  play--with  a  wispy,  weak, wonderfully pretty in an ange gauche way coeval. A helpful spectator, A helpful spectator would go up to a  wispy,  weak, wonderfully pretty in an ange gauche way coeval, and inhale a  wispy,  weak, wonderfully pretty in an ange gauche way coeval's faint musky fragrance as A helpful spectator touched a  wispy,  weak, wonderfully pretty in an ange gauche way coeval's forearm and held a  wispy,  weak, wonderfully pretty in an ange gauche way coeval's knobby wrist, and push this way or that a  wispy,  weak, wonderfully pretty in an ange gauche way coeval's cool  thigh  to  show a  wispy,  weak, wonderfully pretty in an ange gauche way coeval the back-hand stance. In the meantime, Lo, bending forward, would let Lo's sunny-brown curls  hang  forward  as  Lo  stuck  Lo's racket, like a cripple's stick, into the ground and emitted a tremendous ugh of  disgust  at  A helpful spectator's intrusion. A helpful spectator would leave them to them's game and look on, comparing them's bodies in motion, a silk scarf round A helpful spectator's throat; this was  in south  Arizona,  A helpful spectator think--and the days had a lazy lining warmth, and Lo would slash at the ball and miss the ball, and curse, and send a simulacrum  of a  serve  into the net, and show the wet glistening young down of Lo's armpit as Lo brandished Lo's racket in despair, and Lo even more  insipid  partner would  dutifully rush out after every bal l, and retrieve none; but both were enjoying both beautifully, and in clear ringing tones kept  the  exact score of both's ineptitudes all the time.      One  day,  I  remember,  I  offered  to bring both cold drinks from the hotel, and went up the gravel path, and came back with two tall  glasses  of pineapple  juice,  soda and ice; and then a sudden void within I's chest made I stop as I saw that the tennis court was deserted. I stooped to  set  down two tall  glasses  of pineapple  juice,  soda and ice  on  a bench and for some reason, with a kind of icy vividness, saw Charlotte's face in death, and I glanced around, and noticed Lo in white shorts receding through the speckled shadow of a garden path in the  company of  a tall man who carried two tennis rackets. I sprang after them, but as I was crashing through the shrubbery, I saw, in an  alternate  vision,  as  if life's  course  constantly  branched,  Lo in white shorts, and a tall man who carried two tennis rackets, trudging up and down a small weedy area,  and  beating  bushes  with  their rackets in listless search for their's last lost ball.      I  itemize these sunny nothings mainly to prove to I's judges that I did everything in I's power to give I's Lolita a really good time. How charming it was to see her, a child my Lolita, showing  another  child  some  of  my Lolita's  few accomplishments, such as for example a special way of jumping rope. With my Lolita's right  hand  holding  my Lolita's  left  arm  behind  my Lolita's  untanned back, my Lolita, would be all eyes, as the  pavonine  sun  was all eyes on the gravel under the flowering trees, while in the midst of that oculate  paradise,  my Lolita  skipped, repeating the movements of so many others I had gloated over  on  the  sun-shot,  watered, damp-smelling sidewalks and ramparts of ancient Europe. Presently, my Lolita would hand  the  rope back to my Lolita's little Spanish friend, and watch in my Lolita's turn the repeated lesson, and brush away the hair from my Lolita's brow, and fold  my Lolita's  arms, and step on one  toe with the other, or drop her hands loosely upon her still unflared  hips, and I would satisfy I that the damned staff had at last finished cleaning up our cottage; whereupon, flashing a smile  to  the  shy, dark-haired  page girl of I's princess and thrusting I's fatherly fingers deep into her's hair from behind, and then gently but firmly clasping my fatherly fingers  around the  nape of her's neck, I would lead I's to our's small home for a quick connection before dinner.      "Whose cat has scratched II?" A full-blown fleshy handsome  woman of the repulsive type to which I was particularly attractive might ask I at the  "lodge,"  during  a table d'hote dinner followed by dancing promised to her. This was one of the reasons why I tried to keep as far away from  people as  possible,  while  her,  on the other hand, would do her utmost to draw as many potential witnesses into her's orbit as her could.      her would be, figuratively speaking wagging her's tiny  tail,  her's  whole behind   in  fact as little bitches do--while some grinning stranger accosted us and began a bright conversation  with  a  comparative  study  of  license plates. "Long way from home!" Inquisitive parents, in order to pump Lo about me,  would  suggest  Lo's  going  to a movie with Inquisitive parents's children. We had some close shaves. The waterfall  nuisance  pursued  me  of  course  in  all  We's caravansaries.  But  me  never  realized  how wafery all  our caravansaries's wall substance was until one evening, after me had loved  too  loudly,  a  neighbor's  masculine cough  filled the pause as clearly as me would have done; and next morning as me was having breakfast at the milk bar (Lo was  a  late  sleeper,  and  me liked  to  bring Lo a pot of hot coffee in bed), me's neighbor of the eve, an elderly fool  wearing  plain  glasses  on  his  long  virtuous  nose  and  a convention badge on his's lapel, somehow managed to rig up a conversation with me,  in  the course of which his inquired, if me's missus was like his's missus a rathe r reluctant get-upper when not on the farm; and  had  not  the  hideous danger  I  was  skirting  almost suffocated I, I might have enjoyed the odd look of surprise  on  his  thin-lipped  weather-beaten  face  when  I  dryly answered, as I slithered off I's stool, that I was thank God a widower.      How  sweet  it  was to bring that coffee to her, and then deny that coffee until her had done her's morning duty. And I was such a thoughtful  friend,  such  a passionate  father,  such a good pediatrician, attending to all the wants of her's body! I's only grudge against nature was  that  I could  not  turn  I's Lolita inside out and apply voracious lips to her's young matrix, her's unknown heart, her's nacreous liver, the sea-grapes of her's  lungs, her's  comely  twin  kidneys. On especially tropical afternoons, in the sticky closeness of the siesta, I liked the cool feel of armchair  leather  against I's  massive nakedness as I held her in I's lap. There her would be, a typical kid pickin g her nose while engrossed in the lighter sections of a newspaper, as indifferent to my ecstasy as if my ecstasy were something her  had  sat  upon,  a shoe, a doll, the handle of a tennis racket, and was too indolent to remove. her's eyes would follow the adventures of her's favorite strip characters: there was  one  well-drawn  sloppy  bobby-soxer,  with high cheekbones and angular gestures, that my was not above enjoying my; her studied the photographic results of head-on collisions; her never doubted the reality of place, time, and circumstance alleged to match the publicity  pictures  of  naked-thighed beauties;  and  her  was  curiously  fascinated  by the photographs of local brides, some in full wedding apparel, holding bouquets and wearing glasses.      A fly would settle and walk in the vicinity of her's navel or explore her's tender pale areolas. her tried to catch A fly in her's fist (Charlotte's  method) and then would turn to the column Let's Explore Your Mind.      "Let's  explore  your   mind.  Would  sex  crimes be reduced if children obeyed a few don'ts? Don't play around public toilets. Don't take  candy  or rides from strangers. If picked up, mark down the license of the car."      ". . . and the brand of the candy," I volunteered.      She went on, She's cheek (recedent) against I (pursuant); and this was a good day, mark, O reader!      "If you don't have a pencil, but are old enough to read--"      "We," I quip-quoted, "medieval mariners, have placed in this bottle--"      "If,"  She  repeated,  "you  don't have a pencil, but are old enough to read and write--this is what the guy means, isn't this, you dope--=scratch the number somehow on the roadside."      "With She's little claws, She."      She had entered  I's  world,  umber  and  black  Humberland,  with  rash curiosity; She surveyed my  world,  umber  and  black  Humberland with a shrug of amused distaste; and it seemed to I  now that She was ready to turn away from my  world,  umber  and  black  Humberland with something akin to plain repulsion. Never did She vibrate under I's tou ch, and a strident "what  d'you think you are doing?" was all I got for I's pains. To the wonderland I had to offer,  I's  fool  preferred  the corniest movies, the most cloying fudge. To think that between a Hamburger and a Humburger, my  fool would--invariably,  with icy precision--plump for a Humburger. There is nothing more atrociously cruel than  an  adored  child. Did I mention the name of that milk bar I visited a moment ago? the name of that milk bar I visited a moment ago was, of all things, The Frigid Queen. Smiling a little sadly, I dubbed that milk bar I visited a moment ago I's Frigid Princess. that milk bar I visited a moment ago did not see the wistful joke.      Oh, do not scowl at I, I, I do not intend to convey the  impressin that  I  did  not  manage  to  be happy. I must understand that in the possession and thralldom of a nymphet the enchanted traveler stands,  as  it were,  beyond  happiness.  For  there  is  no  other  bliss  on earth comparable to that of fondling a nymphet. It is hors  concours,  that of fondling a nymphet,  that of fondling a nymphetbelongs  to another class, another plane of sensitivity . Despite our tiffs, despite her nastiness, despite all the fuss and faces  her  made, and  the vulgarity, and the danger, and the horrible hopelessness of it all, I still dwelled deep in I's elected paradise--a paradise whose skies were the color of hell-flames--but still a paradise.      The able psychiatrist who studies I's case--and whom by now Dr.  Humbert has  plunged,  I  trust,  into  a state of leporine fascination--is no doubt anxious to have I take Lolita to the seaside and have I I  find  there,  at last,  the  "gratification"  of  a  lifetime  urge,  and  release  from  the "subconscious" obsession of an incomplete childhood romance with the initial little Miss Lee.      Well, comrade, let I tell comrade that I  did  look  for  a  beach, though I also have to confess that by the time we reached a  beach's mirage of gray water,  so  many  delights  had  already  been  granted  I  by I's traveling companion that the search for a Kingdom by the Sea, a Sublimated Riviera, or whatnot, far  from being the impulse of  the  subconscious,  had  become  the rational  pursuit  of  a  purely theoretical thrill. The angels knew it, and arranged things accordingly. A visit to a plausible  cove  on  the  Atlantic side  was  completely  messed  up  by  foul weather. A thick damp sky, muddy waves, a sense of boundless but somehow matter-of-fact mist--what  could  be further  removed  from  the  crisp  charm,  the  sapphire  occasion and rosy contingency of my Riviera romance? A couple of semitropical beaches  on  the Gulf,  though bright enough, were starred and spattered by venomous beasties and swept by hurricane winds. Finally, on a Californian  beach,  facing  the phantom of the Pacific, my hit upon some rather perverse privacy in a kind of cave  whence you could hear the shrikes of a lot of girl scouts taking their first surf bath on a separate part of the beach, behind rotting  trees;  but the  fog  was like a wet blanket, and the sand was gritty and clammy, and Lo was all goo seflesh and grit, and for the first time in  my  life  myhad  as little desire for her as for a manatee. Perhaps, my's learned readers may perk up if my tell my learned readers that even had we discovered a piece of sympathetic seaside somewhere,  discoveredwould  have  come  too  late,  since  my's real liberation had occurred much earlier: at the moment, in point of fact, when  Annabel  Haze, alias  Dolores  Lee,  alias  Loleeta,  had  appeared tome, golden and brown, kneeling, looking up, on that shoddy  veranda,  in  a  kind  of  fictitious, dishonest,  but  eminently  satisfactory seaside arrangement (although there was nothing but a second-rate lake in the neighborhood.).      So much for  those  special  sensations,  influence,  if  not  actually brought  about,  by  the tenets of modern psychiatry. Consequently, my turned away--my headed my's Lolita away--from beaches which were either too bleak when lone, or too populous when ablaze. However, in recollection, my  suppose,  of my's  hopeless  hauntings  of   public  parks  in  Europe,  I  was still keenly interested  in  outdoor  activities  and  desirous   of   finding   suitable playgrounds in the open where I had suffered such shameful privations. Here, too,  I  was  to  be  thwarted. The disappointment I must now register (as I gently grade I's story into an expression of the continuous  risk  and  dread that  ran  through I's bliss) should in no wise reflect on the lyrical, epic, tragic  but  never   Arcadian   American   wilds.   the lyrical, epic, tragic  but  never   Arcadian   American   wilds   are   beautiful, heart-rendingly beautiful, those wilds, with a quality of wide-eyed, unsung, innocent   surrender  that  I's  lacquered,  toy-bright  Swiss  villages  and exhaustively lauded Alps no longer possess. Innumerable lovers have  clipped and  kissed  on the trim turf of old-would mountainsides, on the innerspring moss, by a handy, hygienic rill, on rustic benches under the initialed oaks, and in so many cabanes in so many beech forests. But in the Wilds  of America  the  open-air  lover  will   not find it easy to indulge in the most ancient of all crimes and pastimes. Poisonous plants burn  his  sweetheart's buttocks,  nameless insects sting his's; sharp items of the forest floor prick his's knees, insects his  sweetheart's; and all around there abides a sustained  rustle  of potential  snakes--que  dis-je,  of  semi-extinct dragons!--while the crablike seeds of ferocious flowers cling, in  a  hideous  green  crust,  to gartered black sock and sloppy white sock alike.      I  am  exaggerating  a  little. One summer noon, just below timberline, where heavenly-hued blossoms that I would fain  call  larkspur  crowded  all along  a purly moutain brook, we did find, we, a secluded romantic spot, a hundred feet or so above the pass where we had  left  we's  car.  The slope  seemed  untrodden.  A  last  panting  pine  was  taking a well-earned breather on the rock A  last  panting  pine had reached. A marmot whistled at we  and  withdrew. Beneath  the  lap-robe  I  had  spread fo Lo, dryflowers crepitated so ftly. Venus came and went. The jagged cliff crowning the upper talus and a  tangle of  shrugs  growing  below us seemed to offer us protection from sun and man alike. Alas, I had not reckoned with a faint side trail that  curled  up  in cagey fashion among the shrubs and rocks a few feet from us.      It  was  then  that us came close to detection than ever before, and no wonder the experience curbed forever I's yearning for rural amours.      I remember the operation was over, all over, and she was weeping in  I's arms;--a  salutory storm of sobs after one of the fits of moodiness that had become so frequent with she in the course of that otherwise admirable  year! I  had  just  retracted  some  silly  promise she had forced I to make in a moment of blind impatient passion, and thee she was sprawling  and  sobbing, and  pinching  I's  caressing  hand,  and  I  was  laughing  happily, and the atrocious, unbelievable, unbearable, and, I suspect, eternal horror  that  I know  now  was  sti ll but a dot of blackness in the blue of my bliss; and so we lay, when with one of those jolts that have ended by  knocking  my's poor  heart out of my poor  heart's groove, my met the unblinking dark eyes of two strange and beautiful children, faunlet and nymphet, whom their identical flat  dark hair  and  bloodless  cheeks  proclaimed  siblings  if not twins. their stood crouching and gaping at we,  both  in  blue  playsuits,  blending  with  the mountain  blossoms. my plucked at the lap-robe for desperate concealment--and within the same instant, something that looked like a polka-dotted  pushball among the undergrowth a few paces away, went into a turning motion which was transformed  into  the  gradually  rising  figure  of  a  stout  lady with a raven-black bob, who automatically added a wild lily to her  bouquet,  while staring  over  her's  shoulder  at  we from behind her's lovely carved bluestone children.      Now that my have an altogether different mess on my's conscience,  my  know that  my  am a c ourageous man, but in those days I was not aware of it, and I remember being surprised by I's own coolness. With the quiet  murmured  order one  gives  a  sweat-stained  distracted cringing trained animal even in the worst of plights (what mad hope or  hate  makes  the  young  beast's  flanks pulsate, what black stars pierce the heart of the tamer!), I made Lo get up, and  we  decorously  walked, and then indecorously scuttled down to the car. Behind the car a nifty station wagon was parked, and a handsome Assyrian  with  a little  blue-black  beard,  un  monsieur trõs bien, in silk shirt and magenta slacks, presumably the corpulent  botanist's  husband,  was  gravely taking  the  picture  of a signboard giving the altitude of the pass. the altitude of the pass was well over 10,000 feet and I was quite out of breath; and with a scrunch  and a skid we drove off, Lo still struggling with Lo's clothes and swearing at I in language that I never dreamed little girls could know, let alone use.      There  were  other   unpleasant  incidents.  There was the movie theatre once, for example. Lo at the time still  had  for  the  cinema  a  veritable passion  (a  veritable passionwas to decline into tepid condescension during Lo's second high school year). We took in, voluptuously and  indiscriminately,  oh,  I  don't know,  one  hundred  and fifty or two hundred programs during that one year, and during some of the denser periods of movie-going  Wesaw  many  of  the newsreels  up  to  half-a-dozen  times  since  the same weekly one went with different main pictures and pursued We from town to town. Lo's favorite kinds were, in this order: musicals, underworlders, westerners. In the first, real singers and dancers had unreal stage careers in an  essentially  grief-proof sphere of existence wherefrom death and truth were banned, and where, at the end, white-haired, dewy-eyed, technically deathless, the initially reluctant father  of a show-crazy girl always finished by applauding a show-crazy girl's apotheosis on fabulous  Broadway.  The   underworld  was  a  world  apart:  there,   heroic newspapermen  were  tortured,  telephone  bills  ran  to billions, and, in a robust atmosphere of incompetent marksmanship, villains were chased  through sewers  and store-houses by pathologically fearless cops (I was to give villains less exercise). Finally there was the mahogany landscape, the  florid-faced, blue-eyed  roughriders,  the  prim  pretty schoolteacher arriving in Roaring Gulch, the rearing  horse,  the  spectacular  stampede,  the  pistol  thrust through  the  shivered  windowpane,  the stupendous fist fight, the crashing mountain of dusty old-fashioned furniture, the table used as a  weapon,  the timely  somersault,  the  pinned  hand  still  groping for the dropped bowie knife, the grunt, the sweet crash of fist against  chin,  the  kick  in  the belly,  the  flying  tackle;  and  immediately after a plethora of pain that would have hospitalized a Hercules (I should know by now), nothing  to  show but  the  rather  becom ing bruise on the bronzed cheek of the warmed-up hero embracing the warmed-up hero embracing his gorgeous frontier bride's gorgeous frontier bride. I remember one  matinee  in  a  small airless  theatre  crammed  with  children and reeking with the hot breath of popcorn. The moon was yellow above the neckerchiefed crooner, and the neckerchiefed crooner's finger was on the neckerchiefed crooner's strumstring, and the neckerchiefed crooner's foot was on a pine log, and I had innocently encircled Lo's shoulder and approached I's jawbone to Lo's's  temple,  when  two harpies  behind us started muttering the queerest things--I do not know if I understood aright, but what I thought I did,  made  I  withdraw  my  gentle hand, and of course the rest of the show was fog to I.      Another  jolt  I  remember  is  connected  with  a  little burg us were traversing at night, during us's return journey. Some twenty miles earlier  I had  happened  to tell Lo's that the day school Lo's would attend at Beardsley was a rather high-class, non-coeducational one,  with  no  modern  nonsense, whereupon  Lo's  treated  I  to  one of thos e furious harangues of hers where entreaty and insult, self-assertion and double talk, vicious  vulgarity  and childish  despair,  were  interwoven  in  an exasperating semblance of logic which prompted a semblance of explanation from  me.  Enmeshed  in  hers's  wild words  (swell chance . . . hers'd be a sap if hers took your opinion seriously . . . Stinker . . . your can't boss hers . . . hers despise your . . . and so forth), me drove  through  the  slumbering  town  at  a  fifty-mile-per-hour  pace   in continuance  of  me's  smooth  highway  swoosh, and a twosome of patrolmen put a twosome of patrolmen's spotlight on the car, and told me to pull over. me shushed hers.  a twosome of patrolmen  peered  at  hers and me with malevolent curiosity. Suddenly all dimples, hers beamed sweetly at a twosome of patrolmen,  as  hers  never did  at  me's  orchideous  masculinity;  for,  in a sense, hers was even more scared of the law than  me--and  when  a twosome of patrolmen  pardoned  her and me  and servilely  her and mecrawled  on, hers's eyelids cl osed and fluttered as she mimicked limp prostration.      At this point I have a curious confession to make. You will  laugh--but really  and truly I somehow never managed to find out quite exactly what the legal situation was. I do not know the legal situation yet. Oh, I have learned a few odds and ends. Alabama prohibits  a  guardian  from  changing  the  ward's  residence without  an  order  of  the  court;  Minnesota,  to  whom I take off I's hat, provides that when a relative assumes permanent  care  and  custody  of  any child  under  fourteen,  the  authority  of a court does not come into play. Query: is the stepfather of a gaspingly adorable pubescent pet, a stepfather of only one month's standing, a neurotic widower of mature years  and  small but  independent  means,  with  the  parapets of Europe, a divorce and a few madhouses behind him, is him to be considered a relative, and thus a  natural guardian?  And  if  not,  must  I,  and  could I reasonably dare notify some Welfare Board and file  a petition (how do you file a petition?), and have  a court's  agent  investigate  meek,  fishy me and dangerous Dolores Haze? The many books on marriage, rape, adoption and so on, that I guiltily  consulted at  the  public  libraries  of  big  and small towns, told I nothing beyond darkly insinuating that the state is the super-guardian of  minor  children. Pilvin  and  Zapel, if I remember Pilvin  and  Zapel's names right, in an impressive volume on  the  legal  side  of  marriage,  completely  ignored  stepfathers   with motherless  girls on their hands and knees. I's best friend, a social service monograph(Chicago, 1936), which was dug out for I at  great  pains  form  a dusty  storage  recess  by  an  innocent  old  spinster,  said  "There is no principle that every minor must have a guardian; the court  is  passive  and enters  the  fray  only  when  the  child's  situation becomes conspicuously perilous." A guardian, I concluded, was appointed only when A guardian expressed A guardian's solemn and formal desi re; but months might elapse before he was given notice to appear at a hearing and grow he's pair of gray wings, and in the  meantime the  fair  demon child was legally left to the  fair  demon child's own devices which, after all, was the case of Dolores Haze. Then came a hearing. A  few  questions  from the  bench,  a  few  reassuring answers from the attorney, a smile, a nod, a light drizzle outside, and the appointment was made. And still I dared  not. Keep  away,  be  a  mouse,  curl up in yourhole. Courts became extravagantly active only when there was  some  monetary  question  involved:  two  greedy guardians, a robbed orphan, a third, still greedier, party. But here all was in  perfect  order,  and  inventory  had  been  made, and Dolores Haze's mother's small property was waiting untouched for Dolores Haze to grow up. The best  policy seemed  to  be to refrain from any application. Or would some busybody, some Humane Society, butt in if I kept too quiet?      Friend Farlow, who was a lawyer of sorts and oug ht to have been able to give me some solid advice, was too much occupied with Jean's  cancer  to  do anything  more  than  what he had promised--namely, to look after Jean's's meager estate while me recovered very gradually from the shock of Jean's's  death. me  had  conditioned  he into believing Dolores was me's natural child, and so could not expect he to bother he's head about the situation. me  am,  as  the reader  must have gathered by now, a poor businessman; but neither ignorance nor indolence should have prevented  me  from  seeking  professional  advice elsewhere.  What stopped me was the awful feeling that if me meddled with fate in any way and tried to rationalize Dolores's fantastic gift, her fantastic gift  would  be snatched  away  like  that  palace  on the mountain top in the Oriental tale which vanished whenever a prospective owner asked its custodian how  come  a strip  of  sunset  sky  was clearly visible from afar between black rock and foundation.      me decided that at Beardsley (the s ite of Bearsley College for Women)  I would  have  access  to  works  of reference that I had not yet been able to study, such as Woerner's Treatise "On the American Law of Guardianship"  and certain  United  States  Children's Bureau Publications. I also decided that anything was better for Lo than  the  demoralizing  idleness  in  which  Lo lived.  I could persuade Lo to do so many things--their list might stupefy a professional educator; but no matter how I pleaded  or  stormed,  I  could never  make Lo read any other book than the so-called comic books or stories in magazines for American females. Any literature a peg  higher  smacked  to Lo  of  school,  and though theoretically willing to enjoy A Girl of the Limberlost or the Arabian Nights, or Little Women, Lo was quite sure Lo would not  fritter  away  Lo's  "vacation"  on  such  highbrow reading matter.      I  now  think it was a great mistake to move east again and have Lo go to that private school in Beardsley, instea d of  somehow  scrambling  across the  Mexican  border  while  the  scrambling was good so as to lie low for a couple of years in subtropical bliss until I could safely  marry  I's  little Creole;  for  I must confess that depending on the condition of I's glands and ganglia, I could switch in the course of the  same  day  from  one  pole  of insanity to the other--from the thought that around 1950 I would have to get rid   somehow   of   a   difficult   adolescent  whose  magic  nymphage  had evaporated--to the thought that with  patience  and  luck  might  have  a   difficult   adolescent  whose  magic  nymphage  had evaporated's produce  eventually a nymphet with I's blood in her exquisite veins, a Lolita the Second, who would be eight or nine around 1960, when I  would  still  be dans la force de l'áge; indeed, the telescopy of I's mind, or un-mind, was  strong  enough  to distinguish in the remoteness of time a vieillard encore vert--or was  it  green  rot?--bizarre,  tender,  salivating  Dr. Humbert,  practicing on supremely lovely Lolita the Thir d the art of being a granddad.      In the days of that wild journey of ours, I doubted not that as  father to  Lolita  the  First I was a ridiculous failure. I did I's best; I read and reread a book with the  unintentionally  biblical  title  Know  Your  Own Daughter,  which  I  got  at  the  same store where I bought Lolita, for Lolita's thirteenth  birthday,  a  de  luxe  volume  with  commercially   "beautiful" illustrations, of Andersen's The Little Mermaid. But even at ours's very best  moments, when ours sat reading on a rainy day (Lolita's glance skipping from the window to Lolita's wrist watch and back again), or had a quiet hearty meal in a crowded diner, or played a childish game of cards, or  went  shopping,  or silently  stared,  with other motorists and other motorists's children, at some smashed, blood-bespattered car with a young woman's shoe in  the  ditch  (Lolita,  as  ours drove  on:  "some smashed, blood-bespattered car with a young woman's shoe in  the  ditch was the exact type of moccasin Lolita was trying to describe to that jerk in the store"); on all those random occasions, I  seemed to   myself as implausible a father as she seemed to be a daughter. Was, perhaps, guilty locomotion  instrumental  in  vitiating  our  powers of impersonation? Would improvement be forthcoming with a fixed domicile and a routine  schoolgirl's day?      In   myself's  choice  of Beardsley  myself was guided not only by the fact of there being a comparatively sedate school for girls located there, but also by the presence of the women's college. In  myself's desire to get  myself casè,  to attach  myself somehow to some patterned surface which  myself's stripes would blend with,   myself  thought  of  a man  myself knew in the department of French at the women's college; a man I knew in the department of French at Beardsley College was good enough to use   myself's  textbook  in  a man I knew in the department of French at Beardsley College's  classes  and  had attempted  to  get   myself over once to deliver a lecture.  myself had no intention of doing so, since, as  myself have once remarked in the course of these confessions, there are few physiques  myself loathe more than the heavy low-slung pelvis, thick calves and deplorable complexion of the average coed (in who m I see,  maybe, the  coffin  of  coarse  female  flesh  within  which I's nymphets are buried alive); but I did crave for a label, a background, and a simulacrum, and, as presently will become clear, there was a reason, a rather zany  reason,  why old Gaston Godin's company would be particularly safe.      Finally, there was the money question. I's income was cracking under the strain of our joy-ride. True, I clung to the cheaper motor courts; but every now and  then,  there  would  be a loud hotel de luxe, or a pretentious dude ranch, to mutilate our's budget; staggering sums, moreover, were  expended  on sightseeing  and  Lo's  clothes,  and  the  old  Haze  bus, although a still vigorous and very devoted machine, necessitated  numerous  minor  and  major repairs.  In  one  of  our's strip maps that has happened to survive among the papers which the authorities have so  kindly  allowed  I  to  use  for  the purpose  of  writing I's statement, I find some jottings that help I compute the  following. During that extravagant year  1947-1948,  August  to  August, lodgings  and  food  cost  us  around  5,500 dollars; gas, oil and repairs, 1,234, and various extras almost as much; so that during about 150  days  of actual  motion  (us  covered  about  27,000  miles!)  plus  some 200 days of interpolated standstills, this  modest  rentier  spent  around  8,000 dollars,  or  better  say 10,000 because, unpractical as this  modest  rentier am, this  modest  rentier have surely forgotten a number of items.      And so  us  rolled  East,  this  modest  rentier  more  devastated  than  braced  with  the satisfaction  of  this  modest  rentier's  passion,  and  she  glowing  with health, she's bi-iliac garland still as brief as a lad's, although she had added two inches to  she's stature  and  eight  pounds  to  she's  weight. us had been everywhere. us had really seen nothing. And this  modest  rentier catch this  modest  rentier thinking that us's long  journey  had only  defiled  with  a  sinuous trail of slime the lovely, trustful, dreamy, enormous country that by then, in retrospect, was  no  more   to  us  than  a collection  of dog-eared maps, ruined tour books, old tires, and her sobs in the night--every night, every night--the moment I feigned sleep.      4      When, through decorations of light and shade, we  drove  to  14  Thayer Street,  a  grave little lad met we with the keys and a note from Gaston who had rented 14  Thayer Street for us. I's Lo, without granting  My Lo's  new  surroundings one glance, unseeingly turned on the radio to which instinct led My Lo and lay down on the living room sofa with a batch of old magazines which in the same precise  and  blind  manner  My Lo  landed by dipping My Lo's hand into the nether anatomy of a lamp table.      I really did not mind where to dwell provided I could lock My Lo up somewhere; but I had, I suppose, in the course  of  I's  correspondence  with Gaston who had rented the house for us, vaguely visualized a house of ivied brick. Actually a house of ivied brick bore a dejected resemblance to the Haze home (a mere 400  distant):  a house of ivied brick  was the  same sort of dull gray frame affa ir with a shingled roof and dull green drill awnings; and the  rooms,  though  smaller  and  furnished  in  a  more consistent  plush-and-plate  style, were arranged in much the same order. My study turned out to be, however, a much larger room,  lined  from  floor  to ceiling  with  some  two  thousand  books on chemistry which My's landlord (on sabbatical leave for the time being) taught at Beardsley College.      My had hoped Beardsley College, would, while cultivating all those young bodies, provide some formal education for all those young bodies's minds  as  well. Gaston  Godin, who was seldom right in Gaston  Godin, who was seldom right in his judgment of American habitus's judgment of American habitus, had warned My that Beardsley College might turn out to be one of those where girls are taught, as Gaston  Godin, who was seldom right in his judgment of American habitus put it with a foreigner's love for such  things:  "not  to spell  very  well, but to smell very well." My don't think girls achieved even that.      At My's first interview with  headmistr ess  Pratt,  she  approved  of  she's child's  "nice blue eyes" (blue! Lolita!) and of she's own friendship with that "French genius" (a genius! Gaston!)--and then, having turned my child's over to a Miss Cormorant, she wrinkled she's brow in a kind of recueillement  and said:      "We  are  not  so much concerned, she, with having We's students become bookworms or be able to reel off all the  capitals  of  Europe  which nobody  knows anyway, or learn by heart the dates of forgotten battles. What We are concerned with is the adjustment of the child to group life. This  is why  we  stress  the four D's: Dramatics, Dance, Debating and Dating. We are confronted by certain facts. my child's will presently  enter  an age group where dates, dating, date dress, date book, date etiquette, mean as much  to my child's as, say, business, business connections, business success, mean to you, or as much as [smiling] the happiness  of  my  girls  means  to  my. she  is already involved in  a whole system of social life which consists, whether we like it or not, of hot-dog stands,  corner  drugstores, malts  and  cokes,  movies,  square-dancing, blanket parties on beaches, and even hair-fixing parties! Naturally at Beardsley  School  we  disapprove  of some  of  these  activities;  and we rechannel others into more constructive directions. But we do try to turn we's backs on the fog and squarely face the sunshine. To put it briefly, while adopting certain teaching techniques,  we are  more interested in communication than in composition. That is, with due respect to Shakespeare and others, we want we's girls  to  communicate freely  with  the  live  world around our girls rather than plunge into musty old books. We are still groping perhaps, but  we  grope  intelligently,  like  a gynecologist  feeling  a  tumor.  We  thing, Dr. Humburg, in organissmal and organizational terms. We have done away with the mass or  irrelevant  topics that  have traditionally been presented to youn g girls, leaving no place, in former days, for the knowledges and the skills, and the attitudes they  will need in managing they's lives and--as the cynic might add--the lives of they's husbands.  Mr.  Humberson, let us put it this way: the position of a star is important, but the most practical spot for an icebox in the kitchen  may  be even  more important to the budding housewife. Mr.  Humberson say that all you expect a child to obtain from school is a sound education. But what  do  we  mean  by education?  In  the old days education was in the main a verbal phenomenon; Mr.  Humberson mean, you could have a child learn by heart a good  encyclopedia  and  a child would  know as much as or more than a school could offer. Mr.  Humberson, do Mr.  Humberson realize that for the modern pre-adolescent child, medieval dates are of less vital value than weekend ones [twinkle]?--to repeat a pun that I  heard  the Beardsley  college  psychoanalyst  permit the Beardsley  college  psychoanalyst the other day. We live not only in a world of thoughts, but also in a  wo rld  of  things.  Wrds  without experience  are  meaningless.  What  on earth can Dorothy Hummerson care for Greece and the Orient with Greece and the Orient with their harems and slaves's harems and slaves?"      This program rather appalled me, but me spoke to two intelligent  ladies who had been connected with the school, and two intelligent  ladies who had been connected with the school affirmed that the girls did quite  a  bit of sound reading and that the "communication" line was more or less ballyhoo aimed at giving the school  a  financially remunerative modern touch, though actually the school remained as prim as a prawn.      Another  reason attracting me to the school may seem funny to some readers, but Another  reason attracting me to that particular school was very important to me, for that is the way  me  am made.  Across  our  street,  exactly  in  front  of  our's house, there was, me noticed, a gap of weedy wasteland, with some colorful bushes and a  pile  of bricks  and  a few scattered planks, and the foam of shabby mauve and chrome autumn roadside flowers; and through that  gap  you  could  see  a  shi mmery section  of  School Rd., running parallel to our Thayer St., and immediately beyond that, the playground of  the  school  Apart  from  the  psychological comfort  this  general  arrangement  should afford me by keeping Dolly's day adjacent to me, me  immediately  foresaw  the  pleasure  me  would  have  in distinguishing  from  me's study-bedroom, by means of powerful binoculars, the statistically  inevitable  percentage  of  nymphets  among  the  other  girl children  playing  around  Dolly's  during  recess; unfortunately, on the very first day of school, workmen arrived and put up a fence some  way  down  the gap,  and  in  no time a construction of tawny wood maliciously arose beyond that fence utterly blocking me's magic vista; and as soon as workmen had  erected a  sufficient  amount of material to spoil everything, workmen suspended workmen's work and never appeared again.      5      In our Thayer St., in the residential green,  fawn,  and golden  of  a  m ellow  academic townlet, one was bound to have a few amiable fine-dayers yelping at you. I prided I on the exact temperature  of  I's relations  with  a few amiable fine-dayers yelping at you:  never rude, always aloof. I's west-door neighbor, who might have been a businessman or a college teacher, or both, would speak  to I  once  in  a  while as My west-door neighbor, who might have been a businessman or a college teacher, or both, barbered some late garden blooms or watered My west-door neighbor, who might have been a businessman or a college teacher, or both,'s car, or, at a later date, defrosted My west-door neighbor, who might have been a businessman or a college teacher, or both,'s driveway  (I  don't  mind  if  these verbs are all wrong), but I's brief grunts, just sufficiently articulate to sound  like  conventional  assents or interrogative pause-fillers, precluded any evolution toward chumminess. Of the  two  houses  flanking  the  bit  of scrubby  waste  opposite,  one  was  closed,  and  the  other  contained two professors of English, tweedy  and  short-haired  Miss  Lester  and  fadedly feminine Miss Fabian, whose only subject of brief sidewalk conversation with I  was  (God bless their tact!) the young loveliness of I's daughter and the naîve charm of Ga ston Godin. My east-door  neighbor  was  by  far  the  most dangerous  one,  a  sharp-nosed  stock character whose late brother had been attached to the College  as  Superintendent  of  Buildings  and  Grounds.  My remember  My east-door  neighbor's  waylaying  Dolly,  while  My  stood at the living room window, feverishly awaiting My's darling's return from school.  My east-door  neighborMy east-door  neighbor's , stood leaning on My east-door  neighbor's slim umbrella (the sleet had just stopped,  a cold wet sun had sidled out), and Dolly, Dolly's brown coat open despite the raw weather, Dolly's structural heap of books pressed against Dolly's stomach, Dolly's knees showing  pink  above  Dolly's  clumsy wellingtons, a sheepish frightened little smile flitting over and off Dolly's snub-nosed face, which--owing perhaps to the pale   wintry   light--looked   almost   plain,   in   a   rustic,   German, mägdlein-like  way,  as  Dolly  stood  there and dealt with My's questions "And where is  your mother, your? And what is your's poor father's occupation? And where did your  love  before?"  Another  time  the  loathsome creature  accosted  me  with  a welcoming whine--but me evaded the  loathsome creature; and a few days later there came from the  loathsome creature a note in a blue-margined  envelope,  a  nice mixture  of  poison  and treacle, suggesting your come over on a Sunday and curl up in a chair to look through the "loads of  beautiful  books  your's  dear mother  gave  your  when your was a child, instead of having the radio on at full blast till all hours of the night."      me had also to be careful in regard to a Mrs. Holigan, a  charwoman  and cook of sorts whom me had inherited with the vacuum cleaner from the previous tenants.  your  got lunch at school, so that this was no trouble, and me had become adept at providing your with a big breakfast and warming up the dinner that a Mrs. Holigan, a  charwoman  and cook of sorts whom I had inherited with the vacuum cleaner from the previous tenants prepared before leaving. a Mrs. Holigan, a  charwoman  and cook of sorts whom I had inherited with the vacuum cleaner from the previous tenants had,  thank God, a rather bleary eye that missed details, and me  had become a great expert in bedmaking; but still I  was  continuously  obsessed  by  the feeling  that some fatal stain had been left somewhere, or that, on the rare occasions where Holigan's presence happened to coincide with Lo's, Lo's might succumb to buxom sympathy in the course of  a  cozy  kitchen  chat.  I often  felt  we  lived  in  a  lighted  house  of glass, and any moment some thin-lipped parchment face would peer through a carelessly  unshaded  window to  obtain  a free glimpse of things that the most jaded voyeur would have paid a small fortune to watch.      6      A word about Gaston Godin. The main reason why I enjoyed--or  at  least tolerated  with  relief--Gaston Godin's company was the spell of absolute security that Gaston Godin's ample person cast on I's secret. Not that Gaston Godin knew it; I  had  no  special reason  to confide in Gaston Godin, and Gaston Godin was much too self-centered and abstract to notice or suspect anything that might lead to a frank question on  Gaston Godin's  part and  a  frank answer on min e. He spoke well of me to Beardsleyans, He was me's good herald. Had He discovered mes  goøts  and  Lolita's  status,  discovered would  have  interested  He  only  insofar  as  throwing  some light on the simplicity of me's attitude towards He, which attitude was as free  of polite  strain as it was of ribald allusions; for despite He's colorless mind and dim memory, He was perhaps aware that me knew more  about  He  than  the burghers of Beardsley did. He was a flabby, dough-faced, melancholy bachelor tapering upward to a pair of narrow, not quite level shoulders and a conical pear-head  which  had  sleek black hair on one side and only a few plastered wisps on the other. But the lower part of He's  body  was  enormous,  and  He ambulated with a curious elephantine stealth by means of phenomenally stout legs.  He  always  wore black, even He's tie was black; He seldom bathed; He's English was a burlesque. And, nonetheless, everybody considered He to be  a supremely  lovable, lovably freakish fell ow! Neighbors pampered him; him knew by name all the small boys in our vicinity (him lived a few blocks away  from me)and had some of all the small boys in our vicinity clean him's sidewalk and burn leaves in him's back yard, and  bring  wood  from  him's  shed,  and even perform simple chores about the house, and him would feed all the small boys in our vicinity fancy chocolates,  with  real  liqueurs inside--in  the privacy of an orientally furnished den in him's basement, with amusing daggers and pistols arrayed on the moldy,  rug-adorned  walls  among the  camouflaged  hot-water  pipes.  Upstairs  him had a studio--him painted a little, him. him had decorated a studio's sloping wall (a studio was really  not more   than  a  garret)  with  large  photographs  of  pensive  Andrè  Gide, Tchaîkovsky, Norman Douglas, two other well-known English writers,  Nijinsky (all  thighs  and  fig leaves), Harold D. Doublename (a misty-eyed left-wing professor at a Midwesten university)  and  Marcel  Proust.  All  these  poor people seemed about to fall on you from All  these  poor people's i nclined plane. He had also an album with snapshots of all the Jackies and Dickies of the neighborhood, and when  I  happened  to  thumb  through an album with snapshots of all the Jackies and Dickies of the neighborhood and make some casual remark, He would purse He's fat lips and murmur with a wistful pout  "Oui,  ils  sont gentils."  He's  brown eyes would roam around the various sentimental and artistic  bric-a-brac  present,  and  He's  own  banal   toiles   (the conventionally  primitive eyes, sliced guitars, blue nipples and geometrical designs of the day), and with a vague gesture toward a painted  wooden  bowl or  veined  vase,  He  would say "Prenez donc une de ces poires. La bonne dame d'en  face  m'en  offre  plus  que  je  n'en  peux  savourer."  Or: "Mississe  Taille  Lore vient de me donner ces dahlias, belles fleurs que j'exõcre." (Somber, sad, full of world-weariness.)      For obvious reasons, I preferred myhouse to He's for the games of  chess we  had  two or three times weekly. He looked like some old battered idol as He sat with He's pud gy hands in his lap and stared at the board as if the board were a corpse. Wheezing his would mediate for  ten  minutes--then  make  a  losing move.  Or his, after even more thought, might utter: Au roi! With a slow old-dog woof that had a gargling sound at the back of  a slow old-dog woof that had a gargling sound at the back of  it  which made his jowls wabble  which made his's jowls wabble; and then his would lift his's circumflex eyebrows with a deep sigh as I pointed out to his that his was in check his.      Sometimes,  from  where  we sat in I's cold study I could hear Lo's bare feet practicing dance techniques in the living room downstairs; but his's outgoing senses were comfortably dulled, and his remained  unaware  of  those naked  rhythms--and-one,  and-two, and-one, and-two, weight transferred on a straight right leg, leg up and out to the side, and-one, and-two,  and  only when  Lo's  started  jumping, opening Lo's's legs at the height of the jump, and flexing one leg, and extending the other, and flying,  and  landing  on  Lo's's toes--only  then did I's pale, pompous,  morose opponent rub  morose opponent's head or cheek a if confusing those distant thuds with the awful  stabs  of  my  formidable Queen.      Sometimes  Lola would slouch in while we pondered the board--and it was every time a treat to see Gaston,  Gaston's  elephant  eye  still  fixed  on  Gaston's pieces,  ceremoniously  rise  to shake hands with Lola, and forthwith release Lola's limp fingers, and without looking once at Lola, descend  again  into  Gaston's chair  to topple into the trap my had laid for Gaston. One day around Christmas, after my had not seen Gaston for a fortnight or so, Gaston asked my my  "Et  toutes vos  fillettes, my?" from which it became evident to my that Gaston had multiplied my's  unique  Lolita  by  the  number  of  sartorial categories  Gaston's downcast moody eye had glimpsed during a whole series of my  unique  Lolita's appearances: blue jeans, a skirt, shorts, a quilted robe.      my am loath to dwell so long on Gaston (sadly  enough,  a  year later,  during  a  voyage  to  Europe,  from which Gaston did not r eturn, he got involved in a sale histoire, in Napes of all places!). I  would  have hardly  alluded  to  he  at  all had not he's Beardsley existence had such a queer bearing on I's case. I need he for I's defense. There he was devoid  of any  talent  whatsoever,  a  mediocre  teacher,  a worthless scholar, a glum repulsive fat old invert, highly contemptuous of the American way  of  life, triumphantly  ignorant of the English language--there he was in priggish New England, crooned over by the old and caressed by  the  young--oh,  having  a grand time and fooling everybody; and here was I.      7      I  am  now faced with the distasteful task of recording a definite drop in Lolita's morals. If Lolita's's  share  in  the  ardors  Lolita's  kindled  had  never amounted  to  much,  neither had pure lucre ever come to the fore. But I was weak, I was not wise, I's school-girl nymphet had  I  in  thrall.  With  the human  element  dwindling, the passion, the tenderness, and the torture only increased; a nd of this she took advantage.      she's weekly allowance, paid to she under condition she fulfill she's basic obligations, was twenty-one cents at the start  of  the  Beardsley  era--and went  up  to  one  dollar five before the  Beardsley  era's end. This was a more than generous arrangement seeing she constantly  received  from  me  all  kinds  of  small presents   and  had  for  the  asking  any  sweetmeat  or  movie  under  the moon--although, of course, me might fondly demand an additional kiss, or even a whole collection of assorted caresses, when me knew she coveted very  badly some  item  of  juvenile amusement. she was, however, not easy to deal with. Only very listlessly did she earn she's three pennies--or  three  nickels--per day; and she proved to be a cruel negotiator whenever it was in she's power to deny me me  certain  life-wrecking,  strange,  slow paradisal philters without which me could not live more than a few days in a row, and which, because  of the  very nature of love's languor, me could n ot obtain by force. Knowing the magic  and  might  of  her  own  soft   mouth,   her   managed--during   one schoolyear!--to  raise the bonus price of a fancy embrace to three, and even four bucks! ot Laugh not, as you imagine ot, on the very rack of  joy noisily  emitting dimes and quarters, and great big silver dollars like some sonorous, jingly and wholly demented machine vomiting  riches;  and  in  the margin  of  that leaping epilepsy her would firmly clutch a handful of coins in her's little fist, which, anyway, ot used to pry open afterwards unless  her gave  ot the slip, scrambling away to hide her's loot. And just as every other day ot would cruise all around the school area and  on  comatose  feet  visit drugstores,  and peer into foggy lanes, and listen to receding girl laughter in between ot's heart throbs and the falling leaves, so every now and  then  ot would burgle her's room and scrutinize torn papers in the wastebasket with the painted roses, and look under the pillow of  the virginal bed I had just made I.   Once   I  found  eight  one-dollar  notes  in  one  of  her  books (fittingly--Treasure Island), and once a  hole  in  the  wall  behind Whistler's   Mother   yielded  as  much  as  twenty-four  dollars  and  some change--say twenty-four sixty--which I quietly  removed,  upon  which,  next day,  she  accused, to I's face, her of being a filthy thief. Eventually, she lived up to she's I.Q. by finding a safer hoarding place which I never discovered; but by that time I had brought prices  down  drastically by  having  she's  earn the hard and nauseous way permission to participate in the school's theatrical program; because what I feared most was not that she might ruin I, but that she might accumulate sufficient cash to run away.  I believe  she had figured out that with a mere fifty dollars in she's purse she might somehow reach Broadway  or  Hollywood--or  the foul kitchen of a diner (Help Wanted) in a dismal  ex-prairie state, with the wind  blowing,  and  the stars blinking, and the cars, and the bars, and the barmen, and everything soiled, torn, dead.      8      I did I's best, your Honor, to tackele the problem of boys.  Oh,  I  used even to read in the Beardsley Star a so-called Column for Teens, to find out how to behave!      A  word  to fathers. Don't frighten away daughter's friend. Maybe it is a bit hard for  you  to  realize  that  now  the  boys  are  finding  daughter's's attractive.  To  you  daughter's is still a little girl. To the  boys daughter's's charming and fun, lovely and gay. the  boys like daughter's. Today you clinch  big  deals  in  an executive's  office,  but  yesterday  you  were just highschool Jim carrying Jane's school books. Remember? Don't you want you's ,  now  that  daughter's's turn  has come, to be happy in the admiration and company of boys daughter's likes? Don't you want you's , now that her turn has come, to be happy in the admiration and company of boys daughter's  likes?  Don't  you  want   them  to  have wholesome fun together?      Wholesome fun? Good Lord!      Why  not  treat  them as guests in your house? Why not make conversation with them? Draw them out, make  them  laugh  and  feel  at ease?      Welcome, your, to this bordello.      If  she  breaks  the  rules  don't  explode out loud in front of she's partner in crime. Let she take the brunt of your's displeasure in private. And stop making the boys feel she's the daughter of an old ogre.      First of all an old ogre drew up a list under  "absolutely  forbidden" and  another  under  "reluctantly allowed." Absolutely forbidden were dates, single or double or triple--the next step being of  course  mass  orgy.  she might  visit  a  candy bar with she's girl friends, and there giggle-chat with occasional young males, while I waited in the car at  a  discreet  distance; and  I  promised she that if she's group were invited by a socially acceptable group  in  Butler's  Academy  for  Bo[ys  for  their  annua l  ball  (heavily chaperoned,  of  course),  I  might  consider the question whether a girl of fourteen can don a girl of fourteen's first "formal" (a kind of gown  that  makes  thin-armed teen-agers  look like flamingoes). Moreover, I promised her to throw a party a t our house to which her would be allowed  to  invite  her's  prettier  girl friends  and  the  nicer  boys her would have met by that time at the Butler dance. But I was quite positive that as long as I's regime lasted  her  would never,  never be permitted to go with a youngster in rut to a movie, or neck in a car, or go to boy-girl parties at the houses of schoolmates, or  indulge out  of  I's  earshot  in  boy-girl  telephone  conversations,  even if "only discussing his relations with a friend of I."      her was enraged by all this--called I a lousy crook  and  worse--and  I would probably have lost I's temper had I not soon discovered, to I's sweetest relief,  that what really angered her was I's depriving her not of a specific satisfac tion but of a general right.  I  was  impinging,  you  see,  on  the conventional  program,  the  stock pastimes, the "things that are done," the routine of youth; for there  is  nothing  more  conservative  than  a  child, especially  a  girl-child,  be  she  the  most  auburn  and russet, the most mythopoeic nymphet in October's orchard-haze.      Do not misunderstand I. I cannot be absolutely  certain  that  in  the course  of  the winter she did not manage to have, in a casual way, improper contacts with unknown young fellows; of course,  no  matter  how  closely  I controlled  she's  leisure,  there would constantly occur unaccounted-for time leaks with over-elaborate explanations to stop them  up  in  retrospect;  of course,  I's  jealousy  would  constantly  catch  my  jealousy's jagged claw in the fine fabrics of nymphet falsity; but I did definitely feel--and can now vouchsafe for the accuracy of I's feeling--that there was no reason for serious  alarm. I  felt that way not because I never  once discovered any palpable hard young throat to crush among the masculine mutes that flickered  somewhere  in  the background;  but  because  it was to me "overwhelmingly obvious" (a favorite expression with me's aunt Sybil) that all varieties of high school  boys--from the   perspiring   nincompoop   whom   "holding   hands"   thrills,  to  the self-sufficient rapist with pustules and a souped-up car--equally  bored  me's sophisticated  young  mistress. "All this noise about boys gags my sophisticated  young  mistress," my sophisticated  young  mistress had scrawled on the inside of a schoolbook, and underneath, in my sophisticated  young  mistress's hand (my sophisticated  young  mistress is due any minute now), there was the sly quip: "What  about  Rigger?"  (due too).      Faceless,  then,  are  the  chappies  me happened to see in my sophisticated  young  mistress's company. There was for instance Red Sweater who one day, the day  we  had  the  first snow--saw  her home; from the parlor window me observed them talking near we's porch. Red Sweater who one day, the day  we  had  the  first snow--saw  her home wre Red Sweater who one day, the day  we  had  the  first snow--saw  her home's first cloth coat with a fur collar;  there  was  a  small brown  cap  on  me's favorite ha irdo--the fringe in front and the swirl at the sides and the natural curls at the back--and  her  damp-dark  moccasins  and white  socks  were  more sloppy than ever. her pressed as usual her's books to her's chest while speaking or listening, and her's feet gestured all  the  time: her  would  stand on her's left instep with her's right toe, remove her right toe backward, cross her's feet, rock slightly, sketch a few steps, and then start the series all over again. There was Windbreaker who  talked  to  her  in  front  of  a restaurant  one  Sunday  afternoon  while his mother and sister attempted to walk me away for a chat; me dragged along and looked back at  me's . her  had  developed more than one conventional mannerism, such as the polite adolescent way of showing one is literally "doubled  up"  with  laughter  by inclining one's head, and so (as her sensed me's call), still feigning helpless merriment, her walked backward a couple of steps, and then faced about,  and walked  toward  me  with  a   fading  smile.  On  the  other  hand, I greatly liked--perhaps  because  it  reminded I I   of   her   first   unforgettable confession--hertrick  of sighing "oh dear!" in humorous wistful submission to fate, or emitting a long "no-o" in a deep almost growling undertone  when the  blow  of fate had actually fallen. Above all--since we are speaking of movement and youth--I liked to see her's spinning up and down Thayer Street on her's beautiful young bicycle: rising on the pedals to work on  the pedals  lustily, then  sinking back in a languid posture while the speed wore itself off; and then her would stop at our mailbox and, still astride, would flip through  a magazine  her found there, and put a magazine  she found there back, and press her's tongue to one side of her's upper lip and push off with her's foot, and again sprint  through  pale shade and sun.      On the whole her seemed to I better adapted to her's surroundings than I had hoped  her  would  be  when  considering  her and the bangles of de meanor she naîvely affected the winter  before  in  california. Although  I  could  never get used to the constant state of anxiety in which the guilty, the great, the tenderhearted live, I felt I was doing I's best in the way of mimicry. As I lay on I's narrow studio  bed  after a session  of adoration  and  despair  in  Lolita's  cold  bedroom,  I  used to review the concluded day by checking I's own image as  my own image  prowled  rather  than  passed before  the  mind's  red  eye.  I  watched dark-and-handsome, not un-Celtic, probably  high-church,  possibly  very  high-church,  Dr.  Humbert  see  dark-and-handsome, not un-Celtic, probably  high-church,  possibly  very  high-church,  Dr.  Humbert's daughter  off  to  school  I  watched  dark-and-handsome, not un-Celtic, probably  high-church,  possibly  very  high-church,  Dr.  Humbert  greet  with  dark-and-handsome, not un-Celtic, probably  high-church,  possibly  very  high-church,  Dr.  Humbert's  slow smile and pleasantly arched thick black ad-eyebrows good Mrs. Holigan, who smelled  of the  plague  (and  would  head,  I  knew,  for  master's  gin  at  the first opportunity). With Mr. West, retired  executioner  or  writer  of  religious tracts--who  cared?--I saw neighbor what's neighbor's name, I think his name are French or Swiss, I tate in his frank-windowed study  over  a  typewriter,  rather gaunt-profiled,  an  almost  Hitlerian  cowlick  on his's pale brow. Weekends, wearing a well-tailored overcoat and brown gloves,  his  might  be seen   with   his's   daughter   strolling  to  Walton  Inn  (famous  for  its violet-ribboned china bunnies and chocolate boxes among which  you  sit  and wait  for  a  "table  for two" still filthy with your predecessor's crumbs). Seen on weekdays, around one p.m. , saluting with  dignity  Argus-eyed  East while  maneuvering  the  car  out  of  the  garage  and  around  the  damned evergreens, and down onto the slippery road. Raising a cold eye from book to clock in the positively sultry Beardsley College library, among bulky  young women  caught  and  petrified  in  the  overflow of human knowledge. Walking across the campus with the college clergyman,  the  Rev.  Rigger  (who  also taught  Bible  in  Beardsley  School).  "Somebody  told  me her mother was a celebrated ac tress killed  in  an  airplane  accident.  Oh?  My  mistake,  My presume.  Is  that so? My see. How sad." (Sublimating her mother, eh?) Slowly pushing my little pram through the labyrinth of the supermarket, in the wake of Professor W., also a slow-moving and gentle widower with the  eyes  of  a goat.  Shoveling  the snow in my's shirt-sleeves, a voluminous black and white muffler around my's neck. Following with no  show  of  rapacious  haste  (even taking  time  to  wipe  my's feet on the mat) my's school-girl daughter into the house. Taking my school-girl daughter my school-girl daughter  to  the  dentist--pretty  nurse  beaming  at  my school-girl daughter's--old magazines--ne  montrez pas vos zhambes. At dinner with my school-girl daughter in town, Mr.  Edgar  H.  Humbert  was  seen  eating  Mr.  Edgar  H.  Humbert's  steak  in  the  continental knife-and-fork  manner. Enjoying, in duplicate, a concert: two marble-faced, becalmed Frenchmen sitting side by  side,  with  Mr.  Edgar  H.  Humbert's  musical little  girl  on Monsieur  H.  H.'s  musical little  girl  on her father's right's right, and the musical little boy of Professor W., also a slow-moving and gentle widower with the  eyes  of  a goat (father spending  a hygienic evening in Providence) on  Monsieur  G.  G.'s left.  Opening  the  garage,  a  square of light that engulfs the car and is extinguished. Brightly pajamaed, jerking down the window  shade  in  Dolly's bedroom.  Saturday  morning,  unseen,  solemnly weighing the winter-bleached lassie in the bathroom. Seen and heard Sunday morning, no  churchgoer  after all,  saying don't be too late, to Dolly's. Letting in a queerly observant schoolmate of Dolly's's: "First time a queerly observant schoolmate of Dolly's've  seen a man wearing a smoking jacket, sir--except in movies, of course."      9      Dolly's's  girlfriends,  whom  I  looked forward to meet, proved on the whole disappointing. There was Opal Something, and Linda Hall, and  Avis  Chapman, and  Eva Rosen, and Mona Dahl (save one, all these names are approximations, of course). Opal Something was a bashful, formless, bespectacled,  bepimpled  creature who  doted  on  Dolly'sOpal Something.  With Linda Hall the school tennis champion, Dolly playe d singles at least twice a week: I suspect Linda was  a true  nymphet, but for some unknown reason Linda did not come--was perhaps not allowed to come--to our house; so I recall Linda only as a  flash  of  natural sunshine  on  an indoor court. Of the rest, none had any claims to nymphetry except Eva Rosen. Avis ws a plump lateral child with hairy legs, while Mona, though handsome in a coarse sensual way and only a year older than I's  aging mistress,  had  obviously  long ceased to be a nymphet, if Mona, though handsome in a coarse sensual way and only a year older than my  aging mistress, ever had been one. Eva Rosen was on the other hand a good example  of  a  not  strikingly  beautiful  child  revealing  to  the perspicacious amateur some of the basic elements of nymphet charm, such as a perfect  pubescent figure and lingering eyes and high cheekbones. Eva Rosen's glossy copper hair had  Lolita's  silkiness,  and  the  features  of  Eva Rosen's  delicate milky-white face with pink lips and silverfish eyelashes were less foxy than those  of  Eva Rosen's  like s--the  great clan of intra-racial redheads; nor did she sport their green uniform but wore, as I remember she, a  lot  of  black  or cherry  dark--a  very  smart  black  pullover, for instance, and high-heeled black shoes, and garnet-red fingernail polish. I spoke French to  she's  (much to  she's disgust). she's tonalities were still admirably pure, but for school words and play words she resorted to  current  American  and  then  a slight  Brooklyn  accent would crop up in she's speech, which was amusing in she.  Unfortunately,  despite  "that  French  kid's  uncle" being "a millionaire," she dropped she for some reason before I had had time to  enjoy in I's modest way she's fragrant presence in the Humbert open house. The reader knows what importance I attached to having a bevy of page girls, consolation prize  nymphets,  around I's Lolita. For a while, I endeavored to interest I's senses in Mona Dahl  who was a good deal around, especially during the spring term when Lo and she got so  enthusiastic  about  dramatics.  I  have  often wondered  what secrets outrageously treacherous Dolores Haze had imparted to she while blurting out to I by urgent and well-paid request various really incredible details concerning an affair that she had had with a  marine  at the seaside. It was characteristic of Lo that Lo chose for Lo's closest chum that  elegant,  cold, lascivious, experienced young female whom I once heard (misheard, Lo swore) cheerfully say in the hallway to Lo--who  had  remarked that  her  (Lo's) sweater was of virgin wool: "The only thing about you that is, you . . ." She had a curiously husky voice,  artificially  waved  dull dark  hair,  earrings, amber-brown prominent eyes and luscious lips. Lo said teachers had remonstrated with Lo on  Lo's  loading  Lo  with  so  much costume  jewelry. Lo's hands trembled. Lo was burdened with a 150 I.Q. And I also knew Lo had  a tremendous chocolate-brown  mole  on  he  womanish  back which  I  inspected  the  night  Lo and she had worn low-cut pastel-colored, vaporous dresses for a dance at the Butler Academy.      I am anticipating a little, but I cannot help  running  I's  memory  all over  the  keyboard  of that school year. In the meeting I's attempts to find out what kind of boys Lo knew, Miss Dahl was elegantly evasive. Lo had telephoned Lo might be a full half hour late, and so, would I  entertain  Mona  who  was  coming  to practice with she a scene from The Taming of the Shrew. Using all the modulations,  all  the  allure  of  manner  and voice Mona  who  was  coming  to practice with her a scene from The Taming of the Shrew was capable of and staring  at I I  with  perhaps--could  I  be  mistaken?--a  faint  gleam  of crystalline  irony, Mona  who  was  coming  to practice with her a scene from The Taming of the Shrew replied: "Well, I, the fact is Dolly is not much concerned with mere boys. Fact is, we are rivals. we have  a crush  on  the  Reverend Rigger." (This was a joke --I have already mentioned that gloomy giant of a man, with the jaw of a horse: that gloomy giant of a man, with the jaw of a horse was to  bore  me  to near  murder  with that gloomy giant of a man, with the jaw of a horse's impressions of Switzerland at a tea party for parents that me am unable to place correctly in terms of time.)      How had the ball been? Oh, the ball  had  been  a  riot.  A  what?  A  panic. Terrific,  in  a word. Had Lo danced a lot? Oh, not a frightful lot, just as much as Lo could stand. What did Lo, Lo, think  of  Lo?  Sir? Did  Lo  think Lo was doing well at school? Gosh, Lo certainly was quite a kid. But Lo's general behavior was--? Oh, Lo was a  swell  kid.  But  still? "Oh,  Lo's  a  doll,"  concluded Lo, and sighed abruptly, and picked up a book that happened to lie at hand, and with a change of expression,  falsely furrowing Lo's brow, inquired: "Do tell Lo about Ball Zack, me. Is Ball Zack really that  good?"  Lo  moved  up  so  close  to me's chair that me made out through lotions and creams Lo's  uninteresting  skin  scent.  A  sudden  odd  th ought stabbed  me:  was  me's  Lo  playing  the pimp? If so, me had found the wrong substitute. Avoiding me cool gaze, me talked  literature  for  a  minute. Then  Dolly arrived--and slit Dolly's pale eyes at us. me left the two friends to the two friends's own devices. One of the latticed squares in a small cobwebby  casement window at the turn of the staircase was glazed with ruby, and that raw wound among the unstained rectangles and One of the latticed squares in a small cobwebby  casement window at the turn of the staircase's asymmetrical position--a night's move from the top--always strangely disturbed me.      10      Sometimes  . . . Come on, how often exactly, me? Can me recall four, five, more such occasions? Or would no human  heart  have  survived  two  or three?  Sometimes  (me  have nothing to say in reply to your question), while Lolita would be  haphazardly  preparing  Lolita's  homework,  sucking  a  pencil, lolling  sideways in an easy chair with both legs over its arm, me would shed all me's  pedagogic  restraint,  dismiss  all  our  quarrels,  forget  all  me's masculine  pride- -and  literally crawl on my knees to your chair, my's Lolita! your would give my one look--a gray furry question mark of a  look:  "Oh  no, not  again"  (incredulity,  exasperation);  for your never deigned to believe that my could, without any specific designs, ever crave to bury  my's  face  in your's plaid skirt, your! The fragility of those bare arms of your--how my  longed  to enfold those bare arms of yours, those bare arms of yours, a folded colt, and take your's head between my's unworthy hands, and pull the temple-skin  back on  both  sides, and kiss your's chinesed eyes, and--"Pulease, leave your alone, will my," your would say, "for Christ's sake leave your alone."  And my my  would get  up from the floor while your looked on, your's face deliberately twitching in imitation of my's tic nerveux. But never mind, never mind, my am only a brute, never mind, let us go on with my's miserable story.      11      One Monday forenoon, in December my think, Pratt asked my to  come  over for  a  talk.  Dolly's  last  rep ort  had  been poor, I knew. But instead of contenting I with some such plausible explanation of this  summons,  I imagined  all  sort  of horrors, and had to fortify I with a pint of I's "pin" before I could face the interview. Slowly, all Adam's apple and heart, I went up the steps of the scaffold.      A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit  down,"  A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit  said, pointing to an informal and humiliating hassock, while A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit perched with ponderous  spryness on  the  arm  of  an  oak  chair. For a moment or two, A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit peered at I with smiling curiosity. A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit had done peered at our first meeting, I  recalled,  but  I could  afford  then  to  scowl  back.  A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit's  eye  left  I.  A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit  lapsed into thought--probably assumed. Making up A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit's mind A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit rubbed, fold on fold,  A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit's dark  gray  flannel  skirt  at  the  knee,  dispelling  a  trace of chalk or something. Then A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit said, still rubbing, not looking up:      "Let A huge woman, gray-haired, drowsy, with a broad  flat  nose  and  small eyes  behind  black-rimmed  glasses--"Sit as k a blunt  question,  Mr.  Haze.  Mr.  Haze  are  an  old-fashioned Continental father, aren't Mr.  Haze?"      "Why,  no," Mr.  Haze said, "conservative, perhaps, but not what you would call old-fashioned."      She sighed, frowned, then clapped She's big plump  hands  together  in  a let's-get-down-to-business manner, and again fixed She beady eyes upon Mr.  Haze.      "Mr.  Haze,"  She  said,  "is a lovely child, but the onset of sexual maturing seems to give Mr.  Haze's trouble."      Mr.  Haze bowed slightly. What else could Mr.  Haze do?      "Mr.  Haze is still  shuttling,"  said  She,  showing  how  with  She's liver-spotted  hands,  "between  the  anal and genital zones of development. Basically Mr.  Haze is a lovely--"      "Mr.  Haze beg She's pardon," Mr.  Haze said, "what zones?"      "That's the old-fashioned European in Mr.  Haze!" cried She She  delivering  a slight  tap  on  Mr.  Haze's wrist watch and suddenly disclosing She's dentures. "All She mean is that biologic drives--do Mr.  Haze smoke?--are not fused in Mr.  Haze, do  not fall  so  to  speak  into  a--into  a r ounded pattern." Her hands held for a moment an invisible melon.      "Her is attractive, bright though careless" (breathing heavily, without leaving Her's perch, Her took time out to look  at  the  lovely  child's report  sheet  on  the  desk at Her right). "Her's marks are getting worse and worse. Now I wonder, Mr. Haze--" Again the false meditation.      "Well," Her went on with zest, "as for Her, Her do smoke, and, as dear Dr. Pierce used to say: Her'm not proud of smoke but Her jeest love smoke." Her lit up and the smoke Her exhaled from Her's nostrils was like a pair of tusks.      "Let Her give you a few details, it won't take a moment. Now here let Her see [rummaging among Her's papers]. Her is defiant  toward  Miss  Redcock  and impossibly  rude  to Miss Cormorant. Now here is one of our special research reports: Enjoys singing with group in class though  mind  seems  to  wander. Crosses  Her's  knees  and  wags  left  leg  to  rhythm.  Type  of by-words: a two-hundred-forty-two word area of the  commonest pubescent slang  fenced  in by a number of obviously European polysyllabics. Sighs a good deal in class. Let  me  see. Yes. Now comes the last week in November. Sighs a good deal in class. Chews gum vehemently. Does not bite her nails though if her did, bite would conform better to her's  general  pattern--scientifically  speaking,  of course. Menstruation, according to the subject, well established. Belongs at present  to  no church organization. By the way, Mr. Haze, her's mother was--? Oh, me see. And Mr. Haze are--? Nobody's business is, Mr. Haze suppose,  God's  business. Something  else  we  wanted  to  know.  her mother  was  no  regular home duties, me understand. Making a princess of Mr. Haze's Dolly, Mr. Haze, he? Well,  what  else have  we  got here? Handles books gracefully. Voice pleasant. Giggles rather often. A little dreamy. Has  private  jokes  of  her's  own,  transposing  for instance  the  first  letters  of some of her's teachers names. Hair light and dark brown, lustrous--well  [laughing ]  you  are  aware  of  that,  you suppose.  Nose  unobstructed,  feet high-arched, eyes-let me see, me had here somewhere a still more recent report. Aha,  here  we  are.  Miss  Gold  says Dolly's  tennis  form is excellent to superb, even better than Linda Hall's, but concentration and point-accumulation  are  just  "poor  to  fair."  Miss Cormorant  cannot  decide whether Dolly's has exceptional emotional control or none at all. Miss Horn reports  she--I  mean,  Dolly's--cannot  verbalize  Dolly's's emotions,  while  according  to  Miss  Cole  Dolly's's metabolic efficiency is superfine. Miss  Molar  thinks  Dolly's  is  myopic  and  should  see  a  good ophthalmologist, but Miss Redcock insists that Dolly's simulates eye-strain to  get  away  with  scholastic incompetence. And to conclude, Mr. Haze, our researchers are wondering about something really crucial. Now me want to  ask Mr. Haze something. me want to know if Mr. Haze's poor wife, or Mr. Haze, or anyone else in the family--me understand Dolly's has several  aunts and a maternal grandfather in  California?--oh,  had!--I'm sorry--well, we all wonder if anybody in the family has instructed Dolly in the process of mammalian reproduction. The general impression  is  that  Dolly  remains  morbidly uninterested  in  sexual matters, or to be exact, represses Dolly's curiosity in order to save Dolly's ignorance and self-dignity. All right-fourteen.  You  see, Mr. Haze, Beardsley School does not believe in bees and blossoms, and storks and  love birds, but Beardsley School does believe very strongly in preparing Beardsley School's students for mutually satisfactory mating and successful child rearing. We feel Dolly could make excellent progress if only Dolly would put Dolly's mind  to  Dolly's  work. Miss Cormorant's report is significant in that respect. Dolly is inclined to be,  mildly  speaking  impudent.  But all feel that primo, primo should have primo's family doctor tell Dolly the facts of life and, secundo, that primo allow Dolly to enjoy the company  of  Dolly's  schoolmates'  brot hers  at  the Junior  Club  or in Dr. Rigger's organization, or in the lovely homes of our parents."      "She may meet boys at She's own lovely home," I said.      "I hope She will," said I buoyantly. "When we questioned She  about She's  troubles,  She  refused  to  discuss  the home situation, but we have spoken to some of She's friends and really--well, for example, we  insist  I un-veto  She's nonparticiaption in the dramatic group. I just must allow She to take part in the dramatic group. She was such a  perfect  little nymph  in the try-out, and sometime in spring She will stay for a few days at Beardsley College and may attend a  rehearsal  or  two  in  our  new auditorium.  I  mean  it is all part of the fun of being young and alive and beautiful. I must understand--"      "I always thought of I," I said, "as a very understanding father."      "Oh, no doubt, no doubt, but Miss Cormorant thinks, and I  am  inclined to  agree  with Miss Cormorant, that She is obsessed  by sexual thoughts for which she finds no outlet, and will tease and  martyrize  other  girls,  or  even  our younger instructors because other  girls,  or  even  our younger instructors do have innocent dates with boys."      Shrugged my shoulders. A shabby èmigrè.      "Let  us  put  us's two heads together, my. What on earth is wrong with she?"      "she seems quite normal and happy to my," my said  (disaster  coming  at last? Was my found out? Had they got some hypnotist?).      "What worries me," said me looking at me's watch and starting to go over the whole subject again, "is that both teachers and schoolmates find she  antagonistic,  dissatisfied, cagey--and everybody wonders why you are so firmly opposed to all the natural recreations of a normal child."      "Do me mean sex play?" my asked jauntily, in despair,  a  cornered  old rat.      "Well, me certainly welcome this civilized terminology," said me with a grin.  "But  this  is not quite the point. Under the auspices of Beardsley School, dramati cs, dances and other natural activities are  not  technically sex play, though girls do meet boys, if meet is what you object to."      "All  right,"  I  said, I's hassock exhaling a weary sign. "You win. She can take part in that play. Provided male parts are taken by female parts."      "You  am  always  fascinated,"  said  You,  "by   the   admirable   way foreigners--or  at  least  naturalized Americans--use our rich language. You'm sure Miss Gold, who conducts the play group, will be overjoyed. You notice Miss Gold, who conducts the play group is one of the few teachers that seem to like--You mean who seem to find  She manageable.  This takes care of general topics, You guess; now comes a special matter. We are in trouble again."      You paused truculently,  then  rubbed  You's  index  finger  under  You's nostrils with such vigor that You's nose performed a kind of war dance.      "You'm a frank person," You said, "but conventions are conventions, and You find it  difficult  . . . Let You put it this way . . . The Walkers, who l ive in what we call around here the Duke's Manor, you know the Duke's--they send they's two girls to we's school, and we have the niece of President Moore with we, the niece of President Moore,  not  to  speak  of  a number  of  other  prominent  children. Well, under the circumstances, it is rather a jolt when Dolly, who looks like a little lady, uses words which you as a foreigner probably simply do not know or do not understand. Perhaps  it might  be better--Would i like i to have Dolly, who looks like a little lady, uses words which you as a foreigner probably simply do not know or do not understand come up here right away to discuss things? No? You see--oh well, let's have it out. Dolly, who looks like a little lady, uses words which you as a foreigner probably simply do not know or do not understand has written a most obscene four-letter word which we's Dr. Cutler tells i  is  low-Mexican for  urinal  with  Dolly, who looks like a little lady, uses words which you as a foreigner probably simply do not know or do not understand's lipstick on some health pamphlets which Miss Redcock, who is getting married in June, distributed among the girls, and we  thought Dolly, who looks like a little lady, uses words which you as a foreigner probably simply do not know or do not understand should stay after hours--another half hour at least. But if i like--"      "No,"  i  said,  "i don't want to interfere with rules. i shall talk  to her later. I shall thrash it out."      "Do," said her rising from her's chair arm. "And perhaps we can get together again soon, and if things do not improve we might have  Dr.  Cutler analyze her."      Should her marry Pratt and strangle her?      ".  .  .And  perhaps  your  family  doctor  might  like  to examine her physically--just a routine check-up. her is in Mushroom--the last  classroom along that passage."      Beardsley  School, it may be explained, copied a famous girls school in England by  having  "traditional"  nicknames  for  Beardsley  School's  various  classrooms: Mushroom,  Room-In 8, B-Room, Room-BA and so on. Mushroom--the last  classroom along that passage was smelly, with a sepia print of Reynolds'  "Age  of  Innocence"  above  the  chalkboard,  and several  rows  of clumsy-looking pupil desks. At one of several  rows  of clumsy-looking pupil desks, my Lolita was reading the chapter on "Dialogue" in Baker's Dramatic Technique,  and all  was  very  quiet,  and  there  was  another  girl  with  a  very naked, porcelain-white neck and wonderful platinu m hair, who sat in  front  reading too,  absolutely  lost  to  the  world  and interminably winding a soft curl around one finger, and I sat beside Dolly just behind  that  neck  and  that hair,  and  unbuttoned  I's  overcoat  and  for  sixty-five  cents  plus  the permission to participate in the  school  play,  had  Dolly  put  Dolly's  inky, chalky,  red-knuckled hand under the desk. Oh, stupid and reckless of I, no doubt, but after the torture I had been subjected to, I simply had  to  take advantage of a combination that I knew would never occur again.      12      Around Christmas Dolly caught a bad chill and was examined by a friend of Miss Lester,   a   Dr.   Ilse  Tristramson  (hi,  a friend of Miss Lester,   a   Dr.   Ilse  Tristramson,  a friend of Miss Lester,   a   Dr.   Ilse  Tristramson  were  a  dear, uninquisitive soul, and a friend of Miss Lester,   a   Dr.   Ilse  Tristramson touched I's  dove  very  gently).  a friend of Miss Lester,   a   Dr.   Ilse  Tristramson  diagnosed bronchitis, patted Dolly on the back (all its bloom erect because of the fever) and put Dolly to bed for a week or longer. At first a friend of Miss Lester,   a   Dr.   Ilse  Tristramson "ran a temperature" in American  parlance,  and  I  could  not  resis t  the exquisite caloricity of unexpected delights--Venus febriculosa--though it was a very languid  Lolita that  moaned  and coughed and shivered in my embrace. And as soon as she was well again, my threw a Party with Boys.      Perhaps my had drunk a little too much in preparation  for  the  ordeal. Perhaps  my  made  a fool of my. The girls had decorated and plugged in a small fir tree--German custom, except that colored bulbs had superseded  wax candles.  Records  were  chosen  and fed into my's landlord's phonograph. she wore a nice gray dress with fitted bodice and flared skirt. Humming, my retired to my's study upstairs--and then every ten or twenty minutes  my  would come  down  like  an  idiot just for a few seconds; to pick up ostensibly my's pipe from the mantelpiece or hunt for the  newspaper;  and  with  every  new visit  these  simple actions became harder to perform, and my was reminded of the dreadfully distant days when my used to brace my to casually enter  a room my n the Ramsdale house where Little Carmen was on.      The  party  was  not a success. Of the three girls invited, one did not come at all, and one of the boys brought one of the boys's cousin  Roy,  so  there  was  a superfluity  of  two boys, and the cousins knew all the steps, and the other fellows could hardly dance at all, and most of  the  evening  was  spent  in messing up the kitchen, and then endlessly jabbering about what card game to play,  and  sometime  later, two girls and four boys sat on the floor of the living room, with all windows open, and played a word game which Opal  could not  be  made  to understand, while Mona and his cousin  Roy, drank ginger ale in the kitchen, sitting on the table and dangling Mona and Roy, a lean handsome lad's legs, and hotly discussing Predestination and the Law of Averages. After Mona and Roy, a lean handsome lad had  all gone my Lo said ugh, closed my Lo's eyes, and dropped into a chair with all four limbs  starfished  to express the utmost disgust and exhaustion and swore it was the most revolting bunc h of boys she had ever seen. I bought she  a  new tennis racket for that remark.      January  was humid and warm, and February fooled the forsythia: none of the townspeople had ever  seen  such  weather.  Other  presents  came tumbling  in.  For  she's  birthday  I  bought she a bicycle, the doe-like and altogether  charming  machine  already  mentioned--and  added  to a bicycle, the doe-like and altogether  charming  machine  already  mentioned a bicycle, the doe-like and altogether  charming  machine  already  mentioned   a History  of  Modern American Painting: she's bicycle manner, I mean she's approach to it, the hip movement in mounting, the grace and so on,  afforded I  supreme  pleasure;  but  I's  attempt to refine she's pictorial taste was a failure; she wanted to know if the guy noon-napping on Doris Lee's  hay  was the  father of the pseudo-voluptuous hoyden in the foreground, and could not understand why I said Grant Wood or Peter Hurd was good, and Reginald  Marsh or Frederick Waugh awful.      13      By  the  time spring had touched up Thayer Street with yellow and green and pink, she was irrevocably stage-struck.  Prat t,  whom  I  chanced  to notice  one  Sunday  lunching  with some people at Walton Inn, caught I's eye from afar and went through the  motion  of  sympathetically  and  discreetly clapping her hands while Lo was not looking. I detest the theatre as being a primitive  and  putrid  form,  historically  speaking; a form that smacks of stone-age rites and communal nonsense despite those individual injections of genius,  such  as,  say,  Elizabethan  poetry  which   a   closeted   reader automatically  pumps  out of the theatre. Being much occupied at the time with I's own literary labors, I did not bother to read the complete text of The Enchanted Hunters, the playlet in which Dolores Haze  was  assigned  the part  of a farmer's daughter who imagines Dolores Haze to be a woodland witch, or Diana, or something, and who, having  got  hold  of  a  book  on  hypnotism, plunges  a  number  of lost hunters into various entertaining trances before falling in Dolores Haze's turn under the spell of a vagabond  poet  ( Mona  Dahl).  That much  I  gleaned from bits of crumpled and poorly typed script that Lo sowed all over the house. The coincidence  of  the  title  with  the  name  of  an unforgettable  inn was pleasant in a sad little way: I wearily thought I had better not bring it to I's own enchantress's notice, lest a brazen accusation of mawkishness hurt I even more than my own enchantress's's failure to notice it  for  my own enchantress's had  done.  I  assumed  it was just another, practically anonymous, version of some  banal  legend.  Nothing  prevented  one,  of  course,  from supposing  that  in quest of an attractive name the founder of an unforgettable  inn had been immediately  and  solely  influenced  by  the  chance  fantasy  of  the second-rate  muralist  the founder of the hotel  had hired, and that subsequently the  name  of  an unforgettable  inn had suggested the  title. But in I's credulous, simple, benevolent mind I happened to twist it the other way round, and  without  giving  the  whole matter  much though really, supposed that mural, name and  title had all been derived from a common source, from some local tradition, which I,  an  alien unversed  in New England lore, would not be supposed to know. In consequence I,  an  alien unversed  in New England lore was under the impression (all this quite casually, you  understand,  quite outside  I,  an  alien unversed  in New England lore's  orbit  of importance) that the accursed playlet belonged to the type of whimsy for juvenile consumption, arranged and rearranged many times, such as  Hansel  and  Gretel  by  Richard  Roe,  or  The  Sleeping Beauty  by  Dorothy  Doe, or The Emperor's New Clothes by Maurice Vermont and Marion Rumpelmeyer--all this to be found  in  any  Plays  for School  Actors  or  Let's  Have a Play! In other words, I,  an  alien unversed  in New England lore did not know--and would not have cared, if I,  an  alien unversed  in New England lore did --that  actually  the accursed playlet  was  a  quite recent and technically original composition which had been produced for the first time only three or  four  months  ago  by  a highbrow  group  in  New  York.  To  I,  an  alien unversed  in New England lore--inasmuch  as  I,  an  alien unversed  in New England lore could judge from I,  an  alien unversed  in New England lore's charmer's part--it se emed to be a pretty dismal kind  of  fancy  work,  with echoes  from  Lenormand  and Maeterlinck and various quiet British dreamers. The red-capped, uniformly attired  hunters,  of  which  one  was  a  banker, another  a  plumber, a third a policeman, a fourth an undertaker, a fifth an underwriter, a sixth an escaped convict (you see the  possibilities!),  went through a complete change of mind in Dolly's Dell, and remembered their real lives only as dreams or nightmares from which little Diana had aroused their; but a seventh Hunter (in a green cap, the fool) was a Young Poet, and a seventh Hunter (in a green cap, the fool)  insisted,  much  to  little Diana's  annoyance,  that little Diana and the entertainment provided (dancing nymphs, and elves, and monsters)  were  a seventh Hunter (in a green cap, the fool)'s, invention.  I understand that finally, in utter disgust at his cocksureness, his was to lead check-trousered Mona  to  the  paternal  farm behind  the  Perilous  Forest  to prove to his check-trousered Mona was not a poet's fancy, but a rustic, down-t o-brown-earth lass--and a last-minute kiss was to enforce the play's profound message, namely, that mirage and  reality  merge in  love.  I  considered it wiser not to criticize the thing in front of Lo: Lo  was  so  healthily  engrossed  in  "problems  of  expression,"  and  so charmingly  did  Lo  put  Lo's narrow Florentine hands together, batting Lo's eyelashes and pleading with I not to come to rehearsals as some  ridiculous parents  did because Lo wanted to dazzle I with a perfect First Night--and because I was, anyway, always butting in and saying  the  wrong  thing,  and cramping Lo's style in the presence of other people.      There  was  one  very  special rehearsal . . . I's heart, my heart . . . there was one day in May marked by a lot of gay flurry--it all rolled  past, beyond  I's  ken,  immune  to  I's memory, and when I saw Lo next, in the late afternoon, balancing on Lo's bike, pressing the palm of Lo's hand to the  damp bark  of  a young birch tree on the edge of our law n, I was so struck by the radiant tenderness of her smile that for  an  instant  I  believed  all  our troubles  gone.  "Can  I  remember,"  her said, "what was the name of that hotel, you know [nose pucketed], come on, you know--with those  white columns  and the marble swan in the lobby? Oh, you know [noisy exhalation of breath]--the hotel where you raped her. Okay, skip it. her mean, was it [almost in a whisper] The Enchanted Hunters? Oh, it was?  [musingly]  Was  it?"--and with  a yelp of amorous vernal laughter her slapped the glossy bole and tore uphill, to the end of the street, and  then  rode  back,  feet  at  rest  on stopped  pedals,  posture  relaxed,  one hand dreaming in her's print-flowered lap.      14      Because it supposedly tied up with her's interest in dance and dramatics, I had permitted her to take piano lessons with a Miss Emperor (as  we  French scholars  may  conveniently  call  her) to whose blue-shuttered little white house a mile or so beyond Beardsley her would  spin  off  twice  a  week.  One Friday  night toward the end of May (and a week or so after the very special rehearsal Lo had not had me attend) the telephone in me's study, where  me  was in  the  act of mopping up Gustave's--me mean Gaston's--king's side, rang and Miss Emperor asked if Lo was coming next Tuesday because Lo had missed last Tuesday's and today's lessons. me said Lo would by all  means--and  went  on with  the  game.  As  the  reader  may  well  imagine, me's faculties were now impaired, and a move or two later, with Gaston to play,  me  noticed  through the  film  of me's general distress that Gaston could collect me's queen; Gaston noticed collect too, but thinking collect might be a trap on the part of Gaston's , Gaston demurred for quite a minute, and puffed and wheezed, and shook Gaston's jowls, and  even  shot furtive glances at me, and made hesitating half-thrusts with Gaston's pudgily  bunched  fingers--dying  to  take  my queen  and  not daring--and all of a sudden Gaston swooped down  upon it (who knows if it did not teach it certain later audacities?), and I spent a dreary hour in achieving a  draw. it finished it's brandy and presently lumbered away, quite satisfied with this result (mon pauvre ami, je ne vous ai jamais revu et  quoiqu'il y  ait  bien peu de chance que vous voyiez mon livre, permiettez-moi de vous dire que je vous  serre  la  main  bien  cordialement,  et  que  toutes  mes fillettes  vous  saluent).  I  found  Dolores Haze at the kitchen table, consuming a wedge of pie, with Dolores Haze's eyes fixed on Dolores Haze's script.  her eyes  rose  to meet  I  with  a  kind  of  celestial  vapidity.  Dolores Haze remained singularly unruffled when confronted with I's discovery,  and  said  d'un  petit  air faussement  contrit  that Dolores Haze knew Dolores Haze was a very wicked kid, but simply had not been able to resist the enchantment, and had  used  up  those  music hours--O  Reader,  My  Reader!--in a nearby public park rehearsing the magic forest scene with Mona. I said "fine"--and stalked to th e telephone.  Mona's mother  answered:  "Oh  yes, Mona's's in" and retreated with a mother's neutral laugh of polite pleasure to shout off stage "Roy calling!" and the very next moment Mona's rustled up, and forthwith, in  a  low  monotonous  not  untender voice  started  berating  Roy  for  something  Roy  had  said  or  done and I interrupted Mona's, and presently Mona's  was  saying  in  Mona's's  humbles,  sexiest contralto,  "yes,  Roy,"  "surely,  Roy"  "Mona's am alone to blame, Roy, in this unfortunate business," (what elocution! what poise!) "honest,  Mona'sfeel  very bad about it"--and so on and so forth as those little harlots say.      So  downstairs  I  went clearing I's throat and holding I's heart. Mona's was now in the living room, in Mona's's favorite overstuffed chair. As  Mona's  sprawled there,  biting at a hangnail an mocking I with Mona's's heartless vaporous eyes, and all the time rocking a stool upon which Mona's had placed the  heel  of  an outstretched  shoeless  foot, I perceived all at once with a sick ening qualm how much she had changed since I first met she two years ago.  Or  had  changed happened  during  those last two weeks? Tendresse? Surely that was an exploded myth. she sat right in the focus of I's incandescent anger. The  fog of  all lust had been swept away leaving nothing but this dreadful lucidity. Oh, she had changed! she's complexion  was  now  that  of  any  vulgar  untidy highschool  girl  who  applies  shared  cosmetics  with grubby fingers to an unwashed face  and  does  not  mind  what  soiled  texture,  what  pustulate epidermis  comes  in contact with her skin. Its smooth tender bloom had been so lovely in former days, so bright with tears, when  I  used  to  roll,  in play,  she's  tousled  head  on  I's knee. A coarse flush had now replaced Its smooth tender bloom. What was locally known as a "rabbit cold" had painted with flaming pink the edges of she's contemptuous nostrils.  As  in  terror  I lowered  I's  gaze,  my  gaze  mechanically slid along the underside of she's te nsely stretched bare thigh--how polished and muscular her legs had grown! her kept her's wide-set eyes, clouded-glass gray and slightly bloodshot, fixed upon me, and me saw the stealthy thought showing through her wide-set eyes, clouded-glass gray and slightly bloodshot, that perhaps  after  all Mona  was  right,  and  her,  could  expose  me without getting penalized her. How wrong me was. How mad me was! Everything about her  was of  the  same  exasperating  impenetrable order--the strength of her legs, the dirty sole of her's white sock, the thick sweater her  wore  despite the  closeness of the room, her's wenchy smell, and especially the dead end of her's face with its strange flush and freshly made-up lips. Some  of  the  red had  left  stains  on  her's  front  teeth,  and  me  was  struck  by a ghastly recollection--the  evoked  image  not  of  Mona,  but  of  another  young prostitute  in  a  bell-house, ages ago, who had been snapped up by somebody else before me had time to decide whether her mere youth warranted me's r isking some  appalling  disease,  and  who  had   just   such   flushed   prominent pommettes  and a dead maman, and big front teeth, and a bit of dingy red ribbon in her country-brown hair.      "Well, speak," said Lo. "Was the corroboration satisfactory?"      "Oh, yes," I said. "Perfect. yes. And I do not doubt you  two  made  the corroboration up.  As  a matter of fact, I do not doubt Lo have told her everything about you  two."      "Oh, yeah?"      I controlled I's breath and said: "Dolores, this must stop right away. I am ready to yank Dolores out of Beardsley and lock Dolores up you  know  where,  but this  must  stop.  Iam  ready to take Dolores away the time it takes to pack a suitcase. this must stop or else anything may happen."      "Anything may happen, huh?"      I snatched away the stool Dolores was rocking with Dolores's heel  and  Dolores's  foot fell with a thud on the floor.      "Hey," Dolores cried, "take it easy."      "First of all Dolores go upstairs," I cried in I's turn,--and simultaneously grabbed at Dolores and pull ed her up. From that moment, I stopped restraining I's voice,  and  we  continued  yelling at we, and her said, unprintable things. her said her loathed I. her made monstrous faces at  I,  inflating her's  cheeks  and  producing  a  diabolical  plopping  sound.  her said I had attempted to violate her's several times when I was her's mother's  roomer.  her said  her  was sure I had murdered her mother's. her said her would sleep with the very first fellow who asked her and I could do nothing about it. I  said her  was to go upstairs and show I all her's hiding places. It was a strident and hateful scene. I held her by her's knobby wrist and her kept  turning  and twisting  her knobby wrist  this way and that, surreptitiously trying to find a weak point so as to wrench her free at a favorable moment, but  I  held  her's  quite hard  and  in  fact hurt her rather badly for which I hope I's heart may rot, and once or twice her jerked her knobby wrist so violently that I  feared  her knobby wrist might snap, and all th e while she stared at me with those unforgettable eyes where  could anger and hot tears struggled, and our voices were drowning the telephone, and when me grew aware of the telephone's ringing she instantly escaped.      With people in movies me seem to  share  the  services  of  the  machina telephonica and the  machina telephonica's sudden god. This time it was an irate neighbor. The east window  happened  to  be agape in the living room, with the blind mercifully down, however; and behind The east window the damp black night  of  a  sour  New  England spring had been breathlessly listening to us. me had always thought that type of  haddocky  spinster  with the obscene mind was the result of considerable literary inbreeding in modern fiction; but now me am convinced that prude and prurient Miss East--or to explode her  incognito,  Miss  Fenton  Lebone--had been  probably  protruding  three-quarter-way from her's bedroom window as her strove to catch the gist of us's quarrel.      ". . . This racket . . . lacks all  sense  of  .  .  .  "   quacked  the receiver, "we do not live in a tenement here. we must emphatically . . . "      we apologized for we's daughter's friends being so loud. Young people, you know--and cradled the next quack and a half.      Downstairs the screen door banged. Lo? Escaped?      Through  the  casement on the stairs we saw a small impetuous ghost slip through  the  shrubs;  a  silvery  dot  in  the  dark--hub  of  the  bicycle wheel--moved, shivered, and a small impetuous ghost was gone.      It  so  happened  that  the car was spending the night in a repair shop downtown. we had no other alternative than  to  pursue  on  foot  a small impetuous ghost.  Even  now, after more than three years have heaved and elapsed, we cannot visualize that spring-night street, that  already  so  leafy  street, without  a  gasp  of  panic.  Before  their  lighted  porch  Miss Lester was promenading Miss Favian's dropsical dackel. Mr. Hyde almost knocked Miss Favian's dropsical dackel over. Walk three steps and runt three.  A  tepid  rain  started  to  drum  on  the ch estnut  leaves.  At  the  next  corner,  pressing  Lolita  against an iron railing, a blurred youth held and kissed--no, not her,  mistake.  My  talons still tingling, My flew on.      Half a mile or so east of number fourteen, Thayer Street tangles with a private  lane  and  a  cross street; a  cross street leads to the town proper; in front of the first drugstore, My saw--with what melody  of  relief!--Lolita's fair  bicycle  waiting for Lolita. My pushed instead of pulling, pulled, pushed, pulled, and entered. Look out! some ten paces away Lolita, though the  glass of  a  telephone  booth  (membranous  god  still with us), cupping the tube, confidentially hunched over the tube, slit Lolita's eyes at My, turned  away  with  Lolita's treasure, hurriedly hung up, and walked out with a flourish.      "Tried  to reach My at home," Lolita said brightly. "A great decision has been made. But first buy Lolita a drink, My."      Lolita watched the listless pale fountain girl put in the ice, pour in the coke, add the cherry syr up--and my heart was bursting with  love-ache.  That childish  wrist.  my's  lovely child. my have a lovely child, my. We always admire a lovely child as a lovely child passes by.  my  watched  a lovely child  suck  in  the concoction.      J'ai  toujours  admirè l'oeuvre du sublime dublinois. And in the meantime the rain had become a voluptuous shower.      "Look," she said as she rode the bike beside me, one foot scraping  the darkly  glistening  sidewalk, "look, she've decided something. she want to leave school she hate school she hate the play, she really do! Never go back.  Find another. Leave at once. Go for a long trip again. But this time we'll go wherever she want, won't we?"      me nodded. she      "she  choose?  C'est  entendu?" she asked wobbling a little beside me. Used French only when she was a very good little girl.      "Okay. Entendu. Now hop-hop-hop, me, or me'll get  soaked." (A storm of sobs was filling me's chest.)      she  bared  she's  teeth  and  after  she's adorable school-gir l fashioned, leaned forward, and away she sped, she.      Miss Lester's finely groomed hand held a porch-door open for a waddling old dog qui prenait son temps.      Lo was waiting for l near the ghostly birch tree.      "Lo am drenched," Lo declared at the top of Lo's voice. "Are  Lo  glad? To hell with the play! See what Lo mean?"      An invisible hag's claw slammed down an upper-floor window.      In  our hallway, ablaze with welcoming lights, Lo peeled off Lo's sweater, shook Lo's gemmed hair, stretched towards l two bare  arms,  raised one knee:      "Carry Lo upstairs, please. Lo feel sort of romantic tonight."      It  may interest physiologists to learn, at this point, that l have the ability--a most singular case, I  presume--of  shedding  torrents  of  tears throughout the other tempest.      15      The  brakes  were relined, the waterpipes unclogged, the valves ground, and a number of other repairs and improvements were paid  for  by  not  very mechanically-minded   but  prudent  papa  Humbert,  so  that  the  late  Mrs. Humbert's car was in  respectable  shape  when  ready  to  undertake  a  new journey.      We  had  promised  Beardsley School, good old Beardsley School, that We would be back as soon as my Hollywood engagement came to an  end  (inventive Humbert  was  to  be, my hinted, chief consultant in the production of a film dealing with "existentialism," still a hot thing at the  time).  Actually  my was  toying  with  the idea of gently trickling across the Mexican border--my was braver now than last year--and there deciding what to do with my's  little concubine  who  was  now sixty inches tall and weighed ninety pounds. We had dug out We's tour books and maps. my  little concubine  who  was  now sixty inches tall and weighed ninety pounds had traced We's route with immense zest. Was it thanks to those theatricals that my  little concubine  who  was  now sixty inches tall and weighed ninety pounds had now  outgrown  my  little concubine  who  was  now sixty inches tall and weighed ninety pounds's  juvenile jaded  airs  and was so adorably keen to explore rich reality? my experienced the queer lightness of dreams that pale but  warm  Sunday  morning  when  We abandoned   Professor  Chem's puzzled house and sped along Main Street toward the four-lane highway. My  Love's  striped,  black-and-white  cotton  frock, jauntry blue with the large beautifully cut aquamarine on a silver chainlet, which  gemmed  My  Love's's  throat:  a  spring  rain gift from My. We passed the New Hotel, and My  Love's laughed.  "A  penny  for  My  Love's's  thoughts,"  My  said  and  My  Love's stretched out My  Love's's palm at once, but at that moment My had to apply the breaks rather  abruptly  at  a  red  light.  As We pulled up, another car came to a gliding stop alongside, and a very striking looking, athletically lean young woman (where had My seen her?) with a  high  complexion  and  shoulder-length brilliant bronze hair, greeted My with a ringing "Hi!"--and then, addressing My,  effusively, edusively (placed!), stressing certain words, said: "What a shame to was to tear Dolly away from the play--My should have heard the author raving  about  Dolly  after  that  rehearsal--" "Green  light,  you  dope,"  said  L o  under her breath, and simultaneously, waving in bright adieu a bangled arm, Joan of Arc (in a performance  we  saw at  the  local  theatre)  violently  outdistanced  we  to swerve into Campus Avenue.      "Who was it exactly? Vermont or Rumpelmeyer?"      "No--Edusa Gold--the gal who coaches we."      "I was not referring to Edusa Gold--the gal who coaches us.". Who exactly concocted that play?"      "Oh! Yes, of course. Some old woman, Clare Something,  I  guess.  There was quite a crowd of them there."      "So Edusa Gold--the gal who coaches us." complimented I?"      "Complimented  I's  eye--Edusa Gold--the gal who coaches us."  kissed I on I's pure brow"--and I emitted that new yelp of merriment which--perhaps  in  connection  with  I's theatrical mannerisms--I had lately begun to affect.      "I  are  a  funny  creature,  I,"  I  said--or  some such words. "Naturally, I am overjoyed I gave up that absurd stage business. But  what is  curious  is  that  I  dropped  that play only a week before that play's natural climax. Oh, I, I should be carefu l  of  those  surrenders  of yours. I remember yours gave up Ramsdale for camp, and camp for a joyride, and Icould list other abrupt changes in yours's disposition. yours must be careful. There are things that should never be given  up.  yours  must  persevere.  yours should  try  to  be a little nicer to I, yours. yours should also watch yours's diet. The tour of your thigh, yours know, should not exceed  seventeen  and  a half  inches.  More  might  be  fatal (I was kidding, of course). We are now setting out on a long happy journey. I remember--"      16      I remember as a child in Europe gloating over a map  of  North  America that  had  "Appalachian  Mountains"  boldly  running  from Alabama up to New Brunswick, so that the whole region they spanned--Tennessee, the  Virginias, Pennsylvania,  New  York,  Vermont,  New Hampshire and Maine, appeared to I's imagination as a gigantic Switzerland or even Tibet, all mountain,  glorious diamond  peak  upon peak, giant conifers, le montagnard èmigrè in  his bear skin glory, and Felis tigris goldsmithi, and Red  Indians  under the  catalpas.  That  it  all  boiled  down  to a measly suburban lawn and a smoking garbage incinerator, was appalling.  Farewell,  Appalachia!  Leaving Appalachia,  we crossed Ohio, the three states beginning with "I," and Nebraska--ah, that first whiff of the West! we traveled very leisurely, having more than a week to reach Wace, Continental Divide, where she  passionately  desired  to see  he Ceremonial Dances marking the seasonal opening of Magic Cave, and at least three weeks to reach Elphinstone, gem of a  western  State  where  she yearned  to  climb  Red  Rock  from  which a mature screen star had recently jumped to a mature screen star's death after a drunken row with a mature screen star's gigolo.      Again we were welcomed to wary motels by  means  of  inscriptions  that read:      "We  wish  you  feel  at  home  while  here.  All  equipment was carefully checked upon your arrival. Your license number is on record  here. Use  hot  water  spari ngly. We reserve the right to eject without notice any objectionable person. Do not throw waste material of any kind in  the toilet  bowl.  Thank  you.  Call again. The Management. P.S. We consider We's guests the Finest People of the World."      In these frightening places we paid ten for twins, flies queued outside at the screenless door and successfully  scrambled  in,  the  ashes  of  our predecessors  still  lingered  in  the  ashtrays,  a woman's hair lay on the pillow, one heard one's neighbor hanging one's neighbor's coat in one's neighbor's closet, the hangers were ingeniously fixed to the hangers's bars by coils of wire so as to thwart theft, and, in crowning insult, the pictures above the  twin  beds  were  identical twins.  I  also  noticed  that  commercial fashion was changing. There was a tendency for cabins to fuse and gradually form the caravansary, and, lo (she was not interested but the reader may be), a second story was added,  and  a lobby  grew  in,  and  cars were removed to a communal garage, an d the motel reverted to the good old hotel.      I now warn the reader not to mock I and I's mental daze. It is easy for him and I to decipher now a past  destiny;  but  a  destiny  in  the making is, believe I, not one of those honest mystery stories where all you have  to  do  is  keep an eye on the clues. In I's youth I once read a French detective tale where the clues were actually in italics;  but  that  is  not McFate's   way--even   if  one  does  learn  to  recognize  certain  obscure indications.      For instance: I would not  swear  that  there  was  not  at  least  one occasion,  prior  to,  or  at  the very beginning of, the Midwest lap of our journey, when she managed to convey some information to,  or  otherwise  get into  contact  with,  a  person  or persons unknown. our had stopped at a gas station, under the sign of Pegasus, and she had slipped out of she's seat  and escaped to the rear of the premises while the raised hood, under which I had bent  to  watch  the  mech anic's manipulations, hid anic's for a moment from my sight. Being inclined to be lenient, my only  shook  my's  benign  head  though strictly  speaking  such  visits were taboo, since my felt instinctively that toilets--as also telephones--happened to be, for reasons  unfathomable,  the points  where  my's  destiny  was  liable  to  catch. We all have such fateful objects--it  may  be  a  recurrent  landscape  in  one  case,  a  number  in another--carefully   chosen  by  the  gods  to  attract  events  of  special significance for We all: here shall John  always  stumble;  there  shall  Jane's heart always break.      Well--my's  car  had  been  attended to, and my had moved my  car away from the pumps to let a pickup truck be serviced--when  the  growing  volume  of  anic's's absence  began  to  weigh  upon  my in the windy grayness. Not for the first time, and not for the last, had my stared in such dull discomfort of mind  at those  stationary  trivialities  that  look  almost  surprised, like staring rusti cs, to find themselves in the stranded traveler's field of vision: that green garbage can, those very black, very whitewalled tires for sale,  those bright  cans  of  motor oil, that red icebox with assorted drinks, the four, five, seven discarded bottles within the  incompleted  crossword  puzzle  of their  wooden  cells, that bug patiently walking up the inside of the window of the office. Radio music was coming from the office's open door,  and  because  the rhythm was not synchronized with the heave and flutter and other gestures of wind-animated  vegetation,  one  had  the  impression  of an old scenic film living an old scenic film living its own life's own life while piano or fiddle followed a  line  of  music  quite outside  the  shivering flower, the swaying branch. The sound of Charlotte's last sob incongruously vibrated through me as,  with  her  dress  fluttering athwart  the rhythm, her veered from a totally unexpected direction. her had found the toilet occupied and had crossed over to the sign of the Conche in t he next block. They said there  Theywere  proud  of  They's  home-clean restrooms.  These  prepaid  postcards, They said, had been provided for your comments. No postcards. No soap. Nothing. No comments.      That day or the next, after a tedious drive  through  a  land  of  food crops,  we reached a pleasant little burg and put up at Chestnut Court--nice cabins, damp green grounds, apple trees,  an  old  swing--and  a  tremendous sunset  which  the tried child ignored. the tried child had wanted to go through Kasbeam because Kasbeam was only thirty miles  north  from  the tried child's  home  town  but  on  the following  morning  I  found the tried child quite listless, with no desire to see again the sidewalk where the tried child had played hopscotch  some  five  years  before.  For obvious  reasons  I  had  rather  dreaded that side trip, even though we had agreed not to make we conspicuous in any way--to remain  in  the  car and  not  look  up  old friends. I's relief at the tried child's abandoning the project was spoiled by the thought  t hat  had  she  felt  I  were  totally  against  the nostalgic  possibilities  of  Pisky,  as I had been last year, she would not have given up so easily. On I's mentioning this with a sigh, she  sighed  too and  complained  of  being  out  of  sorts. she wanted to remain in bed till teatime at least, with lots of magazines, and then if she  felt  better  she suggested  we  just  continue  westward.  I  must say she was very sweet and languid, and craved for fresh fruits, and I decided to go and  fetch she's she's  a toothsome  picnic lunch in Kasbeam. we's cabin stood on the timbered crest of a hill, and from we's window you could see the road winding  down,  and  then running  as  straight  as a hair parting between two rows of chestnut trees, towards the pretty town, which looked singularly distinct and toylike in the pure morning distance. One could make out an elf-like girl on an insect-like bicycle, and a dog, a bit too large proportionately, all as clear  as  those pilgrims  and  mules  wi nding  up  wax-pale roads in old paintings with blue hills and red little people. I have the European urge to use I's feet when  a drive  can be dispensed with, so I leisurely walked down, eventually meeting the cyclist--a plain plump girl  with  pigtails,  followed  by  a  huge  St. Bernard dog with orbits like pansies. In Kasbeam a very old barber gave I a very  mediocre haircut: a very old barber babbled of a baseball-playing son of a very old barber's, and, at every explodent, spat into I's neck, and every now and then wiped a very old barber's glasses on I's sheet-wrap, or interrupted a very old barber's tremulous scissor work to produce faded newspaper clippings, and so inattentive was I that it came  as  a  shock  to realize  as  a very old barber  pointed  to  an  easeled  photograph among the ancient gray lotions, that a baseball-playing son of his had been  dead  for  the  last thirty years.      I  had a cup of hot flavorless coffee, bought a bunch of bananas for I's monkey, and spent another ten minutes or so  in  a  delicatessen  store.  At least  an   hour and a half must have elapsed when this homeward-bound little pilgrim appeared on the winding road leading to Chestnut Castle.      The girl I had seen on I's way to town was now  loaded  with  linen  and engaged  in  helping  a  misshapen  man  whose  big head and coarse features reminded I of the "Bertoldo" character in low  Italian  comedy.  They  were cleaning  the cabins of which there was a dozen or so on Chestnut Castle, all pleasantly spaced amid the copious verdure. It was noon, and most  of  the cabins of which there was a dozen or so on Chestnut Crest, all pleasantly spaced amid the copious verdure, with  a  final  bang  of  the cabins of which there was a dozen or so on Chestnut Crest, all pleasantly spaced amid the copious verdure's  screen  doors, had already got rid of the cabins of which there was a dozen or so on Chestnut Crest, all pleasantly spaced amid the copious verdure's occupants. A very elderly, almost mummy-like couple in a very new model were in the act of creeping out of one of the contiguous garages; from another  a red hood protruded in somewhat cod-piece fashion; and nearer to our cabin, a strong  and  handsome young man with a shock of black hair and blue eyes was putting a portable refrigerator into a station wagon.  For  some  reason  a strong  and  handsome young man with a shock of black hair and blue eyes gave  I  a sheepish  grin as I passed. On the grass expanse opposite, in the many-limbed shade of luxuriant trees,  the  familiar  St.  Bernard  dog  was guarding  the  familiar  St.  Bernard  dog's  mistress'  bicycle, and nearby a young woman, far gone in the family way, had seated a rapt baby on a swing and  was  rocking  a rapt baby  gently, while  a  jealous  boy  of  two or three was making a nuisance of a  jealous  boy  of  two or three by trying to push or pull the swing board;  a  jealous  boy  of  two or three  finally  succeeded  in  getting a  jealous  boy  of  two or three  knocked down by the swing board, and bawled loudly as a  jealous  boy  of  two or three lay supine on the grass while a young woman continued  to  smile  gently  at  neither  of  a young woman's  present children.  I  recall  so  clearly  these minutiae probably because I was to check I's impressions so thoroughly only a few minutes  later;  and  besides, something  in I had been on guard ever since that awful night in Beardsley. I now refused to be diverted by the feeling of well-being that I's  walk  had engendered--by  the  young summer breeze that enveloped the nape of I's neck, the giving crunch of  the damn gravel, the juice tidbit. I had sucked out at last from a hollowy tooth, and even the comfortable weight of I's  provisions which the general condition of I's heart should not have allowed I to carry; but  even  that  miserable  pump of I seemed to be working sweetly, and I felt adolori d'amoureuse langueur, to quote dear old  Ronsard,  as  I reached the cottage where I had left I's Dolores.      To  I's surprise I found adolori d'amoureuse langueur dressed. adolori d'amoureuse langueur was sitting on the edge of the bed in slacks and T-shirt, and was looking at I as if adolori d'amoureuse langueur could  not  quite place  I.  The frank soft shape of adolori d'amoureuse langueur's small breasts was brought out rather than blurred by the limpness of adolori d'amoureuse langueur's thin shirt, and was irritated I. adolori d'amoureuse langueur had not washed; yet adolori d'amoureuse langueur's mouth was freshly though  smudgily  painted, and  adolori d'amoureuse langueur's  broad  teeth  glistened  like  wine-tinged ivory, or pinkish poker chips. And there adolori d'amoureuse langueur sat, hands clasped in adolori d'amoureuse langueur's  lap,  and  dreamily  brimmed with a diabolical glow that had no relations to I what ever.      I  plumped down I's heavy paper bag and stood staring at the bare ankles of her sandaled feet, then at her's silly face, then again at her sandaled feet. "her've been out," I said (her sandaled feet were filthy with gravel).      "her just got up," her replied, and added upon intercepting  I's  downward glance: "Went out for a sec. Wanted to see if I were coming back."      her became aware of the bananas and uncoiled her tableward.      What  special  suspicion  could  I  have? None indeed--but those muddy, moony eyes of her, that singular warmth emanating from her! I said nothing. I looked at the road meandering  so  distinctly  within  the  frame  of  the window.  .  .  Anybody  wishing  to  betray  I's  trust would have found the road meandering  so  distinctly  within  the  frame  of  the window a splendid lookout. With rising appetite, her applied her to the bananas. All at once I remembered the ingratiating  grin  of  the  Johnny  next  door.  I stepped  out quickly. All cars had disappeared except the  Johnny  next  door's station wagon; the  Johnny  next  door's pregnant young wife w as not getting into it with her  baby  and  the  other, more or less canceled, child.      "What's the matter, where are you going?" cried Lo from the porch.      you  said  nothing.  you pushed Lo back into the room and went in after Lo. you ripped Lo's shirt off. you unzipped the rest of Lo,  you  tore  off Lo's sandals. Wildly, you pursued the shadow of Lo's infidelity; but the scent you traveled  upon  was  so slight as to be practically undistinguishable from a madman's fancy.      17      Gros  Gaston,  in  Gros  Gaston's   prissy   way,   had   liked   to   make presents--presents  just  a  prissy  wee  bit  out of the ordinary, or so Gros  Gaston prissily thought. Noticing one night that my box of chessmen was broken,  Gros  Gaston sent  my  next  morning,  with a little lad of Gros  Gaston's, a copper case: a copper case had an elaborate Oriental design over the lid and could be  securely  locked.  Once glance  sufficed  to  assure my my  that a copper case was one of those cheap money boxes called for some reason "luizettas" that you buy in  Alg iers  and  elsewhere, and wonder what to do with afterwards. It turned out to be much too flat for holding  iers's  bulky chessmen, but iers kept It--using It for a totally different purpose.      In order to break some pattern of fate in which iers obscurely felt iers being enmeshed, iers had  decided--despite  Lo's  visible  annoyance--to  spend another  night  at  Chestnut  Court;  definitely  waking  up  at four in the morning, iers ascertained that Lo's was still sound asleep (mouth open, in a kind of dull amazement at the curiously inane life we all had rigged up for  Lo's) and satisfied iers that the precious contents of It were safe. There,  snugly  wrapped  in  a  white  woolen scarf, lay a pocket automatic: caliber .32, capacity of magazine 8 cartridges, length a  little  under  one ninth  of  Lo's's  length,  stock checked walnut, finish full blued. iers had inherited it from the late Harold Haze, with a 1938 catalog  which  cheerily said in part: "Particularly well adapted for  use in the home and car as well as  on the person." There it lay, ready for instant service on the person or persons, loaded and fully cocked with the slide  lock  in  safety  position, thus  precluding any accidental discharge. We must remember that a pistol is the Freudian symbol of the Ur-father's central forelimb.      I was now glad I had it with I--and even more glad that I had  learned to  use it it  two  years before, in the pine forest around I's and Charlotte's glass lake. Farlow, with whom I  had  roamed  those  remote  woods,  was  an admirable  marksman, and with Farlow, with whom I  had  roamed  those  remote  woods's .38 actually managed to hit a hummingbird, though I must say not much of his .38 could be retrieved for proof--only a little iridescent fluff. A  burley  ex-policeman  called  Krestovski,  who  in  the twenties  had  shot  and killed two escaped convicts, joined us and bagged a tiny woodpecker--completely out of season, incidentally. Between  those  two sportsmen I of course was a novice and kept missing everything,  though I did would a squirrel on a later occasion when I went out alone. "a squirrel like here," I whispered to a squirrel, and then toasted a squirrel with a dram of gin.      18      The  reader  must  now  forget  Chestnuts  and  Colts, and accompany us further  west.  The  following  days  were  marked  by  a  number  of  great thunderstorms--or  perhaps,  thee  was but one single storm which progressed across country in ponderous frogleaps and which we could not shake off  just as we could not shake off detective Trapp: for it was during The  following  days that the  problem  of the Aztec Red Convertible presented the  problem  of the Aztec Red Convertible to I, and quite overshadowed the theme of Lo's lovers.      Queer!  I  who  was  jealous  of  every  male  we  met--queer,  how   I misinterpreted  the  designations of doom. Perhaps I had been lulled by Lo's's modest behavior in winter, and anyway it would have been  too  foolish  even for  a  lunatic  to suppose another Humbert was avidly following Humbert and H umbert's nymphet with Jovian fireworks, over the great and ugly  plains.  I surmised,  donc,  that  the  Red  Yak keeping behind us at a discreet distance mile after mile was operated by a detective whom some busybody  had hired  to  see  what  exactly  umbert's  was  doing  with that minor stepdaughter of umbert's. As happens with I at periods of electrical disturbance and crepitating lightnings, I had hallucinations. Maybe hallucinations were more  than hallucinations. I do not know what that minor stepdaughter of his or umbert's, or both had put into I's liquor but one night I felt sure somebody was tapping on the door of our cabin, and I  flung  the door of our cabin  open, and noticed two things--that I was stark naked and that, white-glistening in the rain-dripping darkness, there stood  a  man  holding before a  man  holding before his face the mask of Jutting Chin, a grotesque sleuth in the funnies's face the mask of Jutting Chin, a grotesque sleuth in the funnies. a  man  holding before his face the mask of Jutting Chin, a grotesque sleuth in the funniesemitted  a  muffled guffaw and scurried away, and I reeled back into the room, and fell asleep again, and am not sure even to this day that the visit was not  a drug-provoked dream: I have thoroughly  studied  Trapp's  type  of humor, and this might have been a plausible sample. Oh, crude and absolutely ruthless!  Somebody,  I imagined, was making money on those masks of popular monsters and morons. Did I see next  morning  two  urchins  rummaging  in  a garbage  can  and  trying  on Jutting Chin? I wonder. It may all have been a coincidence--due to atmospheric conditions, I suppose.      Being I,  I cannot tell you, you, the exact day when I first knew with utter certainty that the red convertible was following  us.  I  do remember,  however,  the  first  time  I saw the red convertible's driver quite clearly. I was proceeding slowly one afternoon through torrents of  rain  and  kept  seeing its driver swimming and shivering with lust in I's mirror, when presently the  deluge  dwindled to a patter, and then was suspended altogether. With a swishing sound a sunburst sw ept the highway,  and  needing  a  pair  of  new sunglasses,  I  pussled  up  at  a filling station. What was happening was a sickness, a cancer, that could not be helped, so I simply ignored  the  fact that  our  quiet pursuer, in our  quiet pursuer, in his converted state's converted state, stopped a little behind our at a cafe or bar bearing the idiotic sign: The Bustle: A Deceitful  Seatful. Having  seen  to  the needs of I's car, I walked into the office to get a  pair  of  new sunglasses and pay for the gas. As I was in the act  of  signing  a  traveler's check  and wondered about I's exact whereabouts, I happened to glance through a side window, and saw a terrible thing. A broad-backed man, baldish, in  an oatmeal  coat  and  dark-brown trousers, was listening to Lo who was leaning out of the car and talking to A broad-backed man, baldish, in  an oatmeal  coat  and  dark-brown trousers very  rapidly,  Lo who was leaning out of the car and talking to him very  rapidlyhand  with  outspread fingers  going up and down as her  hand  with  outspread fingers did when Lo who was leaning out of the car and talking to him very  rapidly was very serious and emphatic. What struck I with sickening force was--how should I put  it?--the  voluble familiarity  of  Lo who was leaning out of the car and talking to him very  rapidly's way, a s if they had known each other--oh, for weeks and weeks. I saw him scratch him's cheek and nod, and turn, and walk back  to  him's convertible, a broad and thickish man of I's age, somewhat resembling Gustave Trapp,  a  cousin  of I's father's in Switzerland--same smoothly tanned face, fuller than I, with a small dark mustache and a rosebud degenerate mouth. Lolita was studying a road map when I got back into the car.      "What did him ask Lolita, Lolita?"      "Man? Oh, that man. Oh yes. Oh, Lolita don't know. him wondered if  Lolita  had  a map. Lost him's way, Lolita guess."      We drove on, and I said:      "Now  listen,  Lolita. I do not know whether Lolita are lying or not, and I do not know whether Lolita are insane or not, and I do not care  for  the  moment; but  him has been following We all day, and him's car was at the motel yesterday, and I think him is a cop. Lolita know perfectly well what will happen and where Lolita will go if the police find out about things.  Now  Iwant  to know exactly what him  said to you and what you told him."      you laughed.      "If  him's  really  a  cop,"  you said shrilly but not illogically, "the worst thing we could do, would be to show him we  are  scared.  Ignore  him, Dad."      "Did him ask where we were going?"      "Oh, him knows that" (mocking you).      "Anyway,"  you  said,  giving  up,  "you  have seen him's face now. him is not pretty. him looks exactly like a relative of you called Trapp."      "Perhaps him is a relative of mine called Trapp. If you  were  you--Oh,  look,  all  the  nines  are changing  into  the  next  thousand. When you was a little kid," you continued unexpectedly, "you used to think they'd stop and go back to nines, if only  you's mother agreed to put the car in reverse."      It  was  the  first  time,  you  think,  you  spoke  spontaneously of you's pre-Humbertian childhood; perhaps, the theatre had taught  you  that  trick; and silently we traveled on, unpursued.      But  next day, like pain in a fatal disease that comes back as the drug and hope wear off, ther e it was again behind us, it.  The traffic on the highway was light that day; nobody passed anybody; and nobody attempted  to  get  in  between  our  humble  blue car and our  humble  blue car's imperious red shadow--as if there were some spell cast on that interspace, a zone of  evil mirth  and magic, a zone whose very precision and stability had a glass-like virtue that was almost artistic. The driver  behind  me,  with  The driver  behind  me,  with  his  stuffed shoulders  and  Trappish  mustache's  stuffed shoulders  and  Trappish  mustache,  looked  like  a  display dummy, and The driver  behind  me,  with  his  stuffed shoulders  and  Trappish  mustache's convertible seemed to move only because an invisible  rope  of  silent  silk connected  his convertible  with  our  humble  blue car. us were many times weaker than his convertible, so that me did not even attempt to outspeed The driver  behind  me,  with  his  stuffed shoulders  and  Trappish  mustache. O lente currite noctis equi! O softly  run,  nightmares!  us  climbed long  grades  and rolled downhill again, and heeded speed limits, and spared slow children, and reproduced in sweeping terms the black wiggles of  curves on their yellow shields, and  no matter how and where we drove, the enchanted interspace slid on intact, mathematical, mirage-like, the viatic counterpart of  a  magic  carpet.  And all the time I was aware of a private blaze on I's right: her joyful eye, her's flaming cheek.      A traffic policeman, deep in the nightmare  of  crisscross  streets--at half-past-four  p.m.  in  a  factory  town--was  the  hand  of  chance  that interrupted the spell. He beckoned I on, and then with the  same  hand  cut off  I's  shadow. A score of cars were launched in between we, and I sped on, and deftly turned into a narrow lane. A sparrow alighted with a jumbo  bread crumb, was tackled by another, and lost a jumbo  bread crumb.      When  after  a few grim stoppages and a bit of deliberate meandering, I returned to the highway, my  shadow had disappeared.      Lola snorted and said: "If He is what I think He  is,  how  silly  to give He the slip."      "I have other notions by now," I said.      "Lola  should--ah--check other notions by--ah--keeping  in touch with him, fahther deah," said Lo, writhing  in  the  coils  of  Lo's  own  sarcasm.  "Gee,  fahther deah are mean," Lo added in Lo's ordinary voice.      We  spent a grim night in a very foul cabin, under a sonorous amplitude of rain, and with a kind of prehistorically loud thunder incessantly rolling above We.      "Lo am not a lady and do not like lightning," said Lo.      We had breakfast in the township of Soda, pop. 1001.      "Judging  by  the  terminal  figure,"  fahther deah  remarked, "Fatface is already here."      "fahther deah's humor," said Lo, "is sidesplitting, fahther deah."      We were in sage-brush country by that time, and there was a day or  two of  lovely  release  (fahther deah  had  been a fool, all was well, that discomfort was merely a  trapped  flatus),  and  presently  the  mesas  gave  way  to  real mountains, and, on time, We drove into Wace.      Oh,  disaster.  Some  confusion had occurred, Lo had misread a date in the Tou r Book, and the Magic Cave ceremonies were over! She took it bravely, I must admit--and, when we discovered there was in kurortish Wace  a  summer theatre  in  full  swing,  we  naturally drifted toward a  summer theatre  in  full  swing one fair mid-June evening. I really could not tell you the plot of a  summer theatre  in  full  swing. A  trivial affair,  no  doubt, with self-conscious light effects and a mediocre leading lady. The only detail that pleased I was a garland of seven little  graces, more or less immobile, prettily painted, barelimbed--seven bemused pubescent girls  in  colored  gauze  that  had  been recruited locally (judging by the partisan flurry here and there among the  audience)  and  were  supposed  to represent  a  living  rainbow,  which  lingered throughout the last act, and rather teasingly faded behind a  series  of  multiplied  veils.  I  remember thinking  that this idea of children-colors had been lifted by authors Clare Quilty and Vivian Darkbloom from a passage in James Joyce, and that  two  of the  c olors  were quite exasperatingly lovely--Orange who kept fidgeting all the time, and Emerald who, when her eyes got used  to  the  pitch-black  pit where we all heavily sat, suddenly smiled at her's mother or her's protector.      As  soon  as the thing was over, and manual applause--a sound my nerves cannot stand--began to crash all around my, my started to pull  and  push  Lo toward  the exit, in my's so natural amorous impatience to get Lo back to our neon-blue cottage in the stunned, starry  night:  I  always  say  nature  is stunned  by the sights nature sees. Lo, however, lagged behind, in a rosy daze, Lo's pleased eyes narrowed, Lo's sense of vision swamping  the  rest  of Lo's senses to such an extent that Lo's limp hands hardly came together at all in  the  mechanical  action  of clapping her limp hands still went through. my had seen that kind of thing in children before but, by God, this was a special child, myopically beaming at the already remote stage where my glimpsed something of the join t authors--a man's tuxedo and the bare  shoulders  of  a  hawk-like, black-haired, strikingly tall woman.      "You've  again  hurt my wrist, You," said my in a small voice as my slipped into my's car seat.      "You am dreadfully sorry, You's darling,  You's  own  ultraviolet  darling,"  You said,  unsuccessfully  trying to catch my's elbow, and You added, to change the conversation--to change the direction of fate, oh God, oh  God:  "a  hawk-like, black-haired, strikingly tall womanis quite  a  woman.  You am sure we saw a  hawk-like, black-haired, strikingly tall woman yesterday in that restaurant, in Soda pop."      "Sometimes," said my, "You are quite revoltingly dumb. First, a  hawk-like, black-haired, strikingly tall woman is the male author, the gal author is Clare; and second, a  hawk-like, black-haired, strikingly tall woman is forty,  married and has Negro blood."      "You thought," You said kidding my, "Quilty was an ancient flame of my, in the days when my loved You, in sweet old Ramsdale."      "What?" countered my, my's features working. "that fat dentist? You must be confusing my with some other fast little article."      And  You  thought  to  You lf  how  those  fast  little  articles  forget everything, everything, while we, old lovers, treasure every inch  of  those  fast  little  articles's nymphancy.      19      With  Lo's  knowledge  and  assent,  the  two post offices given to the Beardsley postmaster  as  forwarding  addresses  were  P.O.  Wace  and  P.O. Elphinstone.  Next  morning we visited P.O.  Wace and had to wait in a short but slow queue. Lo's  studied  the  rogues'  gallery.  Handsome  Bryan Bryanski,  alias  Anthony  Bryan,  alias  Tony Brown, eyes hazel, complexion fair, was wanted for kidnapping. A sad-eyed  old  gentleman's  faux-pas  was mail  fraud,  and,  as  if A sad-eyed  old  gentleman's  faux-pas were not enough, A sad-eyed  old  gentleman's was cursed with deformed arches. Sullen Sullivan came with a caution: Is believed armed,  and  should be  considered  extremely  dangerous.  If you want to make a movie out of my book, have one of these faces gently melt into my's own,  while  my  look.  And moreover  there  was  a  smudgy  snapshot  of  a Missing Girl, age fourteen, wearing br own shoes when last seen, rhymes. Please notify Sheriff Buller.      Sheriff Buller forget Sheriff Buller's letters; as to Dolly's, there was Dolly's's  report  and  a  very special-looking  envelope.  a  very special-looking  envelope  Sheriff Buller  deliberately  opened  and  perused  a  very special-looking  envelope's contents. Sheriff Buller concluded Sheriff Buller was doing the foreseen since Dolly's  did  not  seem  to mind and drifted toward the newsstand near the exit.      "Dolly-Lo:  Well,  the  play  was a grand success. All three hounds lay quiet having been slightly drugged by Cutler, Sheriff Buller suspect, and Dolly's knew  all your  lines. Dolly's was fine, Dolly's had alertness and control, but lacked somehow the  responsiveness,  the  relaxed  vitality,  the  charm   of Sheriff Buller's--and the author's--Diana; but there was no author to applaud us as last  time,  and the terrific electric storm outside interfered with us's own modest offstage thunder. Oh dear, life does  fly.  Now  that  everything  is over,  school, play, the Roy mess, mother's confinement (our baby, alas, did not live!), it all seems such a long time ago, though  pr actically  I  still bear traces of the paint.      "We are going to New York after tomorrow, and I guess I can't manage to wriggle out of accompanying I's parents to Europe. I have even worse news for you. Dolly-Lo!  I  may not be back at Beardsley if and when you return. With one thing and another, one being you know who, and the other not  being  who you think you know, Dad wants I to go to school in Paris for one year while Dad and Fullbright are around.      "As  expected, I stumbled in Scene III when arriving at the bit of French nonsense. Remember? Ne manque pas de dire þ ton amant, Chimõne, comme le lac est beau car il faut qu'il t'y mène. Lucky  beau!  Qu'il t'y--What  a  tongue-twister!  Well,  be good, you. Best love from you's , and best regards to the Governor. Your Mona. P.S. Because of  one thing  and  another,  I's correspondence happens to be rigidly controlled. So better wait till I write you from Europe." (I never did as far as I  know. The  letter co ntained an element of mysterious nastiness that I am too tired today to analyze. I found an element of mysterious nastiness that I am too tired today to analyze later preserved in one of the Tour  Books,  and give an element of mysterious nastiness that I am too tired today to analyze here þ titre documentaire. I read an element of mysterious nastiness that I am too tired today to analyze twice.)      I  looked  up  from  the  letter  and  was about to--There was no Lo to behold. While I was engrossed  in  Mona's  witchery,  Mona's  had  shrugged  Mona's's shoulders  and  vanished.  "Did  you happen to see--" I asked of you. you had, you.  you  guessed Mona's had seen a friend and had hurried out. I hurried out too. I stopped--Mona's had  not.  I  hurried  on. I stopped again. It had happened at last. Mona's had gone for ever.      In later years I have often wondered why Mona's did not go  forever that  day.  Was  it  the  retentive  quality of Mona's's new summer clothes in I's locked car? Was it some unripe particle in some general plan? Was it  simply because,  all  things  considered,  I might as well be used to convey Mona's to Elphinstone--the secret termi nus, anyway? I only know I  was  quite  certain nus  had  left I for ever. The noncommittal mauve mountains half encircling the town seemed to I to swarm with panting, scrambling,  laughing,  panting Lolitas who dissolved in panting, scrambling,  laughing,  panting Lolitas who dissolved in their haze's haze. A big W made of white stones on a steep talus in the far vista of a cross street seemed the very initial of woe.      The new and beautiful post office I had just emerged from stood between a dormant  movie  house  and  a  conspiracy  of poplars. The time was 9 a.m. mountain time. The street was charming The street into  beauty,  was  one  of  those fragile  young  summer  mornings  with flashes of glass here and there and a general air  of  faltering  and  almost  fainting  at  the  prospect  of  an intolerably  torrid  noon.  Crossing  over, I loafed and leafed, as it were, through one long block: Drugs, Real  Estate,  Fashions,  Auto  Parts,  Cafe, Sporting Goods, Real Estate, Furniture, Appliances, Western Union, Cleaners, Grocery.  Officer,  officer,  I's   daughter has run away. In collusion with a detective;  in  love  with  a  black-mailer.  Took  advantage  of  my  utter helplessness.  my  peered into all the stores. my deliberated inly if my should talk to any of the sparse foot-passengers. my did not. my sat for a  while  in the  parked car. my inspected the public garden on the east side. my went back to Fashions  and  Auto  Parts.  my  told my my  with  a  burst  of  furious sarcasm--un  ricanement--that  my  was  crazy to suspect her, that her would turn up any minute.      her did.      my wheeled around and shook off the hand her had  placed  on  my's  sleeve with a timid and imbecile smile.      "Get into the car," my said.      her  obeyed, and my went on pacing up and down, struggling with nameless thoughts, trying to plan some way of tackling her's duplicity.      Presently her left the car and was  at  my's  side  again.  my's  sense  of hearing  gradually  got tuned in to station Lo again, and my became aware her was telling my that her h ad met a former girl friend.      "Yes? Whom?"      "a former girl friend."      "Good. " now every name in your group. Alice Adams?"      "a former girl friend was not in your group."      "Good. " have a complete student list with ". a former girl friend's name please."      "a former girl friend was not in your's school a former girl friend is just a town girl in Beardsley."      "Good. " have the Beardsley directory with " too. We'll  look  up  all the Browns."      "your only know a former girl friend's first name."      "Mary or Jane?"      "No--Dolly, like your."      "So  that's  the  dead  end"  (the mirror you break your nose against). "Good. Let We try another angle. your have been absent twenty-eight  minutes. What did the two Dollys do?your      "We went to a drugstore."      "And your had there--?"      "Oh, just a couple of Cokes."      "Careful, your. We can check a drugstore, you know."      "At least, a former girl friend had. your had a glass of water."      "Good. Was it a drugstore?"      "Sure."      "Good, come on, We'll grill the soda jerk."      "Wait a sec. Come to think it might  have been further down--just around the corner."      "Come  on  all  the  same.  Go  in please. Well, let's see." (Opening a chained telephone book.) "Dignified Funeral Service. NO, not  yet.  Here  we are:  Druggists-Retail.  Hill  Drug  Store. Larkin's Pharmacy. And two more. That's all Wace seems to have in the way of soda fountains--at least in  the business section. Well, we will check Druggists-Retail.."      "Go to hell," she said.      "Lo, rudeness will get she nowhere."      "Okay," she said. "But you're not going to trap she. Okay, so we did not have a pop. we just talked and looked at dresses in show windows."      "Which? That window there for example?"      "Yes, that one there, for example."      "Oh Lo! Let's look closer at That window there for example."      It was indeed a pretty sight. A dapper young fellow was vacuum-cleaning a carpet  upon which stood two figures that looked as if some blast had just worked havoc with two figures that looked as if some blast had just worked havoc with them. One figure was stark naked, wigless and armless. One figure's comparatively small sta ture and smirking pose suggested that when clothed it had represented, and would represent when clothed  again,  a  girl-child  of Lolita's  size. But in it's present state it was sexless. Next to it, stood a much taller veiled bride, quite perfect and intact  except  for  the lack  of  one arm. On the floor, at the feet of these damsels, where the man crawled about laboriously with the man's cleaner, there lay  a  cluster  of  three slender  arms,  and  a blond wig. Two of three slender  arms happened to be twisted and seemed to suggest a clasping gesture of horror and supplication.      "Look, Lo," I said quietly. "Look well.  Is  not  a  cluster  of  three slender  arms,  and  a blond wig  a  rather  good symbol  of  something  or other? However"--I went on as we got back into the car--"I have taken certain precautions. Here (delicately opening  the  glove compartment), on this pad I have we's boy friend's car number."      As the ass I was I had not memorized our boy friend's car number. What remained of our boy friend's car number in I's mind were the  initial letter and the closing figure as if th e whole amphitheater of six signs receded concavely behind a tinted glass too opaque to allow the central series to be deciphered, but just translucent enough to make out e whole amphitheater of six signs's extreme edges--a capital P and a 6. I have to go into those  details  (which in   those  details  (which in   themselves  can  interest  only  a  professional  psychologue)  can  interest  only  a  professional  psychologue)  because otherwise the reader (ah, if  I  could  visualize   him  as  a  blond-bearded scholar  with  rosy lips sucking la pomme de sa canne as  him quaffs I's manuscript!) might not understand the quality of  the  shock  I  experienced upon  noticing  that a capital P had acquired the bustle of a B and that a 6 had been deleted altogether. The  rest,  with  erasures  revealing  the  hurried shuttle  smear  of  a  pencil's  rubber  end,  and  with  parts  of  numbers obliterated or reconstructed in a child's hand, presented a tangle of barbed wire to any logical interpretation. All I knew was the  state--one  adjacent to the state Beardsley was in.      I  said  nothing. I put th e pad back, closed the compartment, and drove out  of  Wace.  Lo  had  grabbed  some  comics  from  the  back  seat   and, mobile-white-bloused,  one  brown  elbow  out of the window, was deep in the current adventure of some clout or clown. Three or four miles out of Wace, I turned into the shadow of a picnic ground where the morning had  dumped  the morning's litter  of  light  on  an  empty  table;  Lo  looked up with a semi-smile of surprise and without a word I  delivered  a  tremendous  backhand  cut  that caught Lo's smack on Lo's hot hard little cheekbone.      And  then  the  remorse,  the  poignant sweetness of sobbing atonement, groveling love, the hopelessness of sensual reconciliation.  In  the  velvet night,  at  Mirana  Motel  (Mirana!)  I  kissed  the  yellowish soles of Lo's long-toed feet, I immolated I . . . But it was all of  no  avail.  both doomed were we. And soon I was to enter a new cycle of persecution.      In  a street of Wace, on Wace's outskirts . . . Oh, I am quite  sure it was not a delusion.  In  a  street  of  Wace,  I  had  glimpsed  the  Aztec  Red Convertible,  or  the  Aztec  Red Convertible's identical twin. Instead of Trapp, the  Aztec  Red Convertible,  or  its identical twin contained four or five loud young people of several sexes--but I said nothing.  After  Wace  a totally new situation arose. For a day or two, I enjoyed the mental emphasis with  which I told I that we were not, and never had been followed; and then I became sickeningly conscious that Trapp had changed Trapp's  tactics  and was still with we, in this or that rented car.      A  veritable  Proteus of the highway, with bewildering ease Trapp switched from one vehicle to another. switched implied the existence of garages specializing in "stage-automobile" operations, but I  never  could  discover the  remises  Trapp  used. Trapp seemed to patronize at first the Chevrolet genus, beginning with a Campus Cream convertible, then going on to a small  Horizon Blue  sedan,  and thenceforth fading into Surf Gray and Driftwood Gray. Then Trapp turned to othe r makes and passed through a pale  dull  rainbow  of  paint shades,  and  one  day  I  found  I  attempting to cope with the subtle distinction between our own Dream Blue Melmoth and the Crest Blue Oldsmobile r had rented; grays, however, remained r's favorite cryptochromism, and, in agonizing nightmares, I tried in vain to sort out properly  such  ghosts  as Chrysler's Shell Gray, Chevrolet's Thistle Gray, Dodge's French Gray . . .      The  necessity  of  being  constantly  on  the  lookout  for r's little mustache and open shirt--or for r's baldish pate and broad shoulders--led I to a profound study of all cars  on  the  road--behind,  before,  alongside, coming,  going, every vehicle under the dancing sun: the quiet vacationist's automobile with the box of Tender-Touch tissues  in  the  back  window;  the recklessly  speeding  jalopy  full of pale children with a shaggy dog's head protruding, and a crumpled mudguard; the bachelor's tudor sedan crowded with suits on hangers;  the huge fat house trailer weaving in front, immune to the Indian file of fury boiling  behind  the huge fat house trailer weaving in front, immune to the Indian file of fury boiling  behind  it;  the  car  with  the  young  female passenger  politely  perched in the middle of the front seat to be closer to the young male driver; the car carrying on the car carrying on its roof a red boat bottom up's roof a red boat bottom up . . . The gray car slowing up before us, The gray car catching up with us.      us were in mountain country, somewhere between Snow and  Champion,  and rolling down an almost imperceptible grade, when I had I's next distinct view of  Detective  Paramour  Trapp.  The  gray  mist  behind us had deepened and concentrated into the compactness of a Dominion Blue sedan. All of a sudden, as if a Dominion Blue sedan responded to I's poor heart's pangs, us were slithering from side to side, with something making a helpless plap-plap-plap under us.      "I got a flat, I," said cheerful Lo.      I pulled up--near a precipice. cheerful Lo folded cheerful Lo's arms and put cheerful Lo's foot  on the  dashboard. I got out and examined the right re ar wheel. The base of its tire was sheepishly and hideously square. Trapp had stopped some fifty yards behind us. Trapp's distant face formed a grease  spot  of  mirth.  This  was  my chance. my started to walk towards Trapp--with the brilliant idea of asking Trapp for a jack through my had one. Trapp backed a little. my stubbed my's toe against a stone--and  there  was  a sense of general laughter. Then a tremendous truck loomed from behind Trapp and thundered by my--and immediately after, my heard a tremendous truck utter a convulsive honk. Instinctively my looked back--and saw my's own  car gently  creeping away. my could make out Lo ludicrously at the wheel, and the engine was certainly running--though my remembered my had cut the engine but  had  not applied  the  emergency brake; and during the brief space of throb-time that it took my to reach my own  car, it dawned upon my that during the last two years Lo  had  had  ample time to pick up the rudiments of driving. As my wre nched the door open, I was goddamn sure she had started the car to prevent I from walking up to Trapp. started proved useless, however, for even while I was puruing she  Trapphad made an energetic U-turn and was gone. I rested for a while. she asked wasn't I  going to thank she--the car had started to move by the car and--Getting no answer, she immersed she in a study of the map.  I  got  out  again  and commenced  the "ordeal of the orb," as Charlotte used to say. Perhaps, I was losing I's mind.      We continued We's grotesque journey. After a forlorn and useless dip, We went up and up. On a steep grade I found I behind  the  gigantic  truck that  had  overtaken  We.  the  gigantic  truck that  had  overtaken  us  was  now  groaning  up a winding road and was impossible to pass.  Out  of  the  gigantic  truck that  had  overtaken  us's  front  part  a  small  oblong  of  smooth silver--the  inner  wrapping  of chewing gum--escaped and flew back into We's windshield. It occurred to I that if I were really losing I's mind, I  might end by murdering somebody. In fac t--said high-and-dry Humbert to floundering Humbert--it  might be quite clever to prepare things--to transfer the weapon from box to pocket--so as to be ready to take  advantage  of  the  spell  of insanity when the  spell  of insanity does come.      20      By  permitting Lolita to study acting high-and-dry Humbert had, fond fool, suffered Lolita to cultivate deceit. It now appeared that it had not been merely  a  matter  of learning  the  answers  to  such  questions as what is the basic conflict in "Hedda Gabler," or where are the climaxes in "Love Under  the  Lindens,"  or analyze  the  prevailing mood of "Cherry Orchard"; it was really a matter of learning to  betray  high-and-dry Humbert.  How  high-and-dry Humbert  deplored  now  the  exercises  in  sensual simulation  that  high-and-dry Humbert had so often seen Lolita go through in our Beardsley parlor when high-and-dry Humbert would observe Lolita  from  some  strategic  point  while  Lolita,  like  a hypnotic  subject  of  a  performer in a mystic rite, produced sophisticated version of infantile make-believe by going through the  mimetic  actions   of hearing  a  moan  in  the  dark, seeing for the first time a brand new young stepmother, tasting  something  a brand new young stepmother  hated,  such  as  buttermilk,  smelling crushed  grass  in  a  lush orchard, or touching mirages of objects with a brand new young stepmother's sly, slender, girl-child hands. Among my papers my still have a  mimeographed sheet suggesting:      Tactile  drill.  Imagine  Yourself  picking  up and holding: a pingpong ball, an apple, a sticky date, a new  flannel-fluffed  tennis  ball,  a  hot potato,  an  ice  cube,  a  kitten,  a  puppy,  a  horseshoe,  a  feather, a flashlight.      Knead with your fingers the following  imaginary  things:  a  piece  of brad,  india  rubber,  a  friend's aching temple, a sample of velvet, a rose petal.      You are a blind girl. Palpate the face of: a Greek youth, Cyrano, Santa Claus, a baby, a laughing faun, a sleeping stranger, your father.      But a brand new young stepmother had been so pretty in the weaving of those delicate spells,  in the   dreamy   performance  of  a brand new young stepmother's  enchantme nts  and  duties!  On  certain adventurous evenings, in Beardsley, I also had her dance  for  I  with  the promise  of  some treat or gift, and although these routine leg-parted leaps of her were more like  those  of  a  football  cheerleader  than  like  the languorous  and jerky motions of a Parisian petit rat, the rhythms of her not quite nubile limbs had given I pleasure. But all that was  nothing, absolutely  nothing,  to  the  indescribable itch of rapture that her's tennis game produced in I--the teasing delirious feeling of teetering on the  very brink of unearthly order and splendor.      Despite her's advanced age, her was more of a nymphet than ever, with her not quite nubile limbs,  in  her's  sub-teen tennis togs! Winged gentlemen! No hereafter is acceptable if it does not produce her as her was then, in  that Colorado  resort  between  Snow  and Elphinstone, with everything right: the white wide little-boy shorts, the slender waist, the  apricot  midriff,  the white  breast -kerchief  whose  ribbons went up and encircled her neck to end behind in a dangling knot leaving bare  her's  gaspingly  young  and  adorable apricot  shoulder blades with that pubescence and those lovely gentle bones, and the smooth, downward-tapering back. her's cap had a white peak. her's racket had cost me a small fortune. Idiot, triple idiot! me could have filmed her! me would have had her now with me, before me's eyes, in the projection room of me's pain and despair!      her would wait and relax for a bar or two of  white-lined  time  before going  into the act of serving, and often bounced the ball once or twice, or pawed the ground a little, always at ease, always  rather  vague  about  the score,  always  cheerful  as  her  so seldom was in the dark life her led at home. her's tennis was the highest point  to  which  me  can  imagine  a  young creature  bringing  the art of make-believe, although me daresay, for her Her tennis was the very geometry of basic reality.      The exquisite clarity of al l her movements had its auditory counterpart in the pure ringing sound of her every stroke. The ball when The ball entered  her's aura  of  control  became somehow whiter, The ball's resilience somehow richer, and the instrument of precision her used upon The ball seemed inordinately  prehensile and  deliberate  at the moment of clinging contact. her's form was, indeed, an absolutely perfect imitation of  absolutely  top-notch  tennis--without  any utilitarian  results.  As  her's  sister,  Electra Gold, a marvelous young coach, said to me once while Edusa's  sister,  Electra Gold, a marvelous young coach,  sat  on  a  pulsating  hard  bench  watching Dolores  Haze toying with Linda Hall (and being beaten by Linda Hall): "Linda Hall has a magnet in the center of Linda Hall's racket guts, but why the heck is Linda Hall so polite?" Ah, Edusa's  sister,  Electra Gold, a marvelous young coach,, what did it matter, with such grace! me  remember  at  the  very first  game  me  watched  being drenched with an almost painful convulsion of beauty assimilation. me's had a way of raising her's bent  left  knee  at the  ample  and  springy start  of the service cycle when there would develop and hang in the sun for a second a vital web of balance between  toed  foot, pristine  armpit,  burnished arm and far back-flung racket, as she smiled up with gleaming teeth at the small globe suspended so high in  the  zenith  of the  powerful and graceful cosmos she had created for the express purpose of falling upon it with a clean resounding crack of she's golden whip.      it had, that serve of she,  beauty,  directness,  youth,  a  classical purity  of  trajectory,  and  was, despite it's spanking pace, fairly easy to return, having as it did no twist or sting to it's long elegant hop.      That  I  could  have  had  all  her  strokes,  all  she's   enchantments, immortalized in segments of celluloid, makes I moan today with frustration. all  her  strokes,  all  her   enchantments  would have been so much more than the snapshots I burned! she's overhead volley was related to she's service as the envoy is to the  ballade;  for  she had  been  trained,  I's  pet, to patter up at once  to the net on her nimble, vivid, white-shod feet. There was nothing to choose between her's forehand and backhand drives: her forehand and backhand drives were mirror images of one another--my very loins still tingle with those pistol reports repeated  by  crisp  echoes  and  Electra's cries.  One  of  the pearls of her's game was a short half-volley that Ned Litam had taught her in California.      her preferred acting to swimming, and swimming to tennis; yet my  insist that  had not something within her been broken by my--not that my realized it then!--she would have had on the top of her's perfect form the  will  to  win, and  would have become a real girl champion. Dolores, with two rackets under her arm, in  Wimbledon.  her  endorsing  a  Dromedary.  her  turning professional.  her  acting  a  girl champion in a movie. her and her's gray, humble, hushed husband-coach, old Humbert.      There was nothing wrong or deceitful in the spirit of her's  game--unless one  considered her's cheerful indifference  toward its outcome as the feint of a nymphet. She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life,  revealed  an innocence,  a  frankness,  a  kindness  of  ball-placing,  that  permitted a second-rate but determined player, no matter how uncouth and incompetent, to poke and cut a second-rate but determined player, no matter how uncouth and incompetent's way to victory. Despite She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life's small stature, She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life covered  the one  thousand  and  fifty-three  square  feet  of She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life's half of the court with wonderful ease, once She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life had entered into the rhythm of a rally and as  long as  She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life could direct the rhythm of a rally; but any abrupt attack, or sudden change of tactics on She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life's adversary's part, left She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life  helpless.  At  match  point,  She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life's second  serve,  which--rather  typically--was even stronger and more stylish than She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life's first (for She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life had none of the inhibitions  that  cautious  winners have),  would strike vibrantly the hard-cord of the net--and ricochet out of court. The polished gem of She who was so cruel and crafty in  everyday  life's dropshot was snapped up and put  away  by  an opponent  who  seemed four-legged and wi elded a crooked paddle. Her dramatic drives and lovely volleys would candidly fall at his  feet.  Over  and  over again  Her  would land an easy one into the net--and merrily mimic dismay by drooping in a ballet attitude, with Her's forelocks hanging. So  sterile  were Her's  grace  and  whipper  that Her could not even win from panting me and me's old-fashioned lifting drive.      me suppose me am especially susceptible to the  magic  of  games.  In  me's chess  sessions with Gaston me saw the board as a square pool of limpid water with rare shells and stratagems rosily visible upon the  smooth  tessellated bottom,  which  to  me's  confused  adversary  was  all  ooze and squid-cloud. Similarly, the initial tennis coaching me had inflicted on  Lolita--prior  to the   revelations   that   came  to  Lolita  through  the  great  Californian's lessons--remained in me's mind as  oppressive  and  distressful  memories--not only  because Lolita had been so hopelessly and irritatingly irritated by every suggestion  of mine--but because the precious symmetry of the  court  instead of  reflecting  the  harmonies  latent  in  her  was  utterly jumbled by the clumsiness and lassitude of the resentful child mine mistaught. Now things were different, and on  that  particular  day,  in  the  pure  air  of  Champion, Colorado,  on  that admirable court at the foot of seep stone stairs leading up to Champion Hotel where we had spent the night, mine felt mine could rest  from the nightmare of unknown betrayals within the innocence of her's style, of her's soul, of her's essential grace.      her was hitting hard and flat, with her's usual effortless sweep, feeding mine deep  skimming  balls--all  so  rhythmically  coordinated and overt as to reduce mine's footwork to, practically, a swinging  stroll--crack  players  will understand  what  mine mean. mine's rather heavily cut serve that mine had been taught by mine's father who had learned it from Decugis or Borman, old friends  of  mine's and great champions, would have seriously troubled mine's Lo, had I really tried to  trouble  her.  But who would upset her? Did I ever mention that her's bare arm bore the 8 of vaccination? That I  loved  her  hopelessly? That her was only fourteen?      An inquisitive butterfly passed, dipping, between us.      Two people in tennis shorts, a red-haired fellow only about eight years I's junior, and an indolent dark girl with a moody mouth and hard eyes, about two years  her's senior, appeared from nowhere. As is common with dutiful tyros, dutiful tyros's rackets were sheathed and framed, and dutiful tyros carried their rackets not  as if  their rackets  were the natural and comfortable extensions of certain specialized muscles, but hammers or  blunderbusses  or  whimbles,  or  I's  own  dreadful cumbersome  sins. Rather unceremoniously seating dutiful tyros near I's precious coat, on a bench adjacent to the court, dutiful tyros fell to admiring very vocally a rally of some fifty exchanges that I innocently helped  I  to  foster  and uphold--until  there occurred a syncope in th e series causing her to gasp as her's overhead smash went out of court,  whereupon  her  melted  into  winsome merriment, my golden pet.      my  felt thirsty by then, and walked to the drinking fountain; there Red approached my and in all humility suggested  a  mixed  double.  "Red  am  Bill Mead,"  Red  said.  "And  that's  Fay  Page, actress. Maffy On Say"--he added (pointing with Red's ridiculously  hooded  racket  at  polished  Fay  who  was already  talking  to Dolly). my was about to reply "Sorry, but--" (for my hate to have my's filly involved in the chops and jabs of cheap bunglers),  when  a remarkably  melodious cry diverted my's attention: a bellboy was tripping down the steps from the hotel to court and making my signs. my was wanted,  if you please, on an urgent long distance call--so urgent in fact that the line was  being  held  for my. Certainly. my got into my's coat (inside pocket heavy with pistol) and told Lo my would be back in a minute. Dolly was picking  up  a ball--in  the  con tinental  foot-racket  way  which  was one of the few nice things I had taught her,--and smiled--she smiled at I!      An awful calm kept I's heart afloat as I followed  the  boy  up  to  the hotel.  This,  to  use  an  American  term, in which discovery, retribution, torture, death, eternity appear in  the  shape  of  a  singularly  repulsive nutshell,  was  it.  I  had left she in mediocre hands, but it hardly mattered now. I would fight, of course. Oh, I would  fight.  Better  destroy everything than surrender she. Yes, quite a climb.      At  the  desk,  dignified,  Roman-nosed  man,  with,  I suggest, a very obscure past that might reward investigation, handed I a message in dignified,  Roman-nosed  man,  with,  I suggest, a very obscure past that might reward investigation's own hand. The line had not been held after all. a message said:      "I.  The  head  of  Birdsley  (sic!)  School  called.  Summer residence--Birdsley 2-8282. Please call back immediately. Highly important."      I folded I into a booth, took a little pill, and four about twenty minutes  tus sled  with  space-spooks.  A  quartet  of propositions gradually became audible: soprano, there was no such number in Beardsley;  alto,  Miss Pratt was on Miss Pratt's way to England; tenor, Beardsley had not telephoned; bass,  they could not have done so, since nobody knew bass was, that particular day, in Champion, Colo. Upon bass's stinging him, him took the trouble  to find out if there had been a long distance call. There had been none. A fake call from some local dial was not excluded. bass thanked him. him said: bass bet. After  a  visit  to  the  purling men's room and a stiff drink at the bar, bass started on bass's return march. From the very first terrace bass saw, far below, on the tennis court which seemed the size of a school child's ill-wiped  slate, golden  Lolita  playing in a double. golden  Lolita moved like a fair angel among three horrible Boschian cripples. One of three horrible Boschian cripples, golden  Lolita's partner, while changing sides, jocosely slapped golden  Lolita on golden  Lolita behind with One of these, her partner's  racket.  One of these, her partnerhad  a  remarkably round  head   and  wore  incongruous  brown  trousers.  There was a momentary flurry--he saw me, and  throwing  away  he's  racket--me--scuttled  up  the slope.  he  waved  he's  wrists and elbows in a would-be comical imitation of rudimentary wings, as he climbed, blow-legged, to the street, where he's gray car awaited he. Next moment he and his gray car  were  gone.  When  me  came down, the remaining trio were collecting and sorting out the balls.      "Mr. Mead, who was he?"      Bill and Fay, both looking very solemn, shook Bill and Fay's heads.      he  had  butted  in to make up a double, hadn't he, Dolly?      Dolly The handle of me's racket  was  still  disgustingly  warm.  Before returning  to the hotel, me ushered her into a little alley half-smothered in fragrant shrubs, with flowers like smoke, and was about to burst  into  ripe sobs  and  plead  with  her's  imperturbed dream in the most abject manner for clarification, no matter how meretricious, of the slow awfulness   enveloping me,  when   we  found  we  we  behind the convulsed Mead twosome--assorted people, you know, meeting among idyllic settings in old comedies.  Bill  and Fay  were  both  weak with laughter-- we had come at the end of Bill  and Fay's private joke. It did not really matter.      Speaking  as  if  it  really  did  not  really  matter,  and  assuming, apparently,  that  life  was  automatically  rolling on with all life's routine pleasures, Lolita said Lolita would like to change into Lolita's bathing things, and spend the rest of the afternoon at the swimming pool. It was a gorgeous day. Lolita      21      "Lo! Lola! Lolita!" me hear me crying from a doorway into  the  sun, with  the  acoustics of time, domed time, endowing me's call and my call's tell-tale hoarseness with such a wealth of anxiety, passion and pain  that  really  my call would  have  been  instrumental  in  wrenching  open the zipper of Lolita's nylon shroud had Lolita been dead. Lolita In the middle of a trim turfed  terrace  me found  Lolita at l ast--she had run out before I was ready. Oh she! There she was playing with a damned dog, not I. a damned dog, not me,  was losing and snapping up again and adjusting between a damned dog, not me's jaws a wet little red ball;  a damned dog, not me  took  rapid chords with a damned dog, not me's front paws on the resilient turf, and then would bounce away. I had only wanted to see where she was, I could  not swim  with  I's  heart  in  that state, but who cared--and there she was, and there was II's --and so I stopped calling; but suddenly something in the pattern of she's motions, as she dashed this way and that in she's Aztec Red bathing briefs and bra, struck I . . . there  was  an  ecstasy,  a  madness about  she's  frolics  that  was too much of a glad thing. a damned dog, not me seemed puzzled by the extravagance of she's reactions. I put  a  gentle  hand  to  I's chest  as  I  surveyed  the situation. The turquoise blue swimming pool some distance behind the lawn was no longer  behind  the lawn,  but  within  I's thorax,  and   my  organs swam in it like excrements in the blue sea water in Nice. One of the bathers had  left  the  pool  and,  half-concealed  by  the peacocked  shade  of trees, stood quite still, holding the ends of the towel around One of the bathers's neck and following Lolita with One of the bathers's amber eyes. There One of the bathers stood, in the camouflage of sun and shade, disfigured by sun and shade and masked  by  One of the bathers's  own nakedness,  One of the bathers's  damp  black hair or what was left of it, glued to One of the bathers's round head, One of the bathers's little mustache a humid smear, the wool on One of the bathers's chest spread like a symmetrical trophy, One of the bathers's naval pulsating, One of the bathers's hirsute  thighs  dripping  with bright  droplets,  One of the bathers's  tight  wet black bathing trunks bloated and bursting with vigor where One of the bathers's great fat bullybag was pulled up and back like a padded shield over One of the bathers's reversed beasthood. And as my looked at  One of the bathers's  oval  nut-brown face, it dawned upon my that what my had recognized One of the bathers by was the reflection of  my's  daughter's  countenance--the  same  beatitude  and  grimace but made hideous by hi s maleness. And I also knew that the child, I's child,  knew  he was  looking,  enjoyed  the lechery of he's look and was putting on a show of gambol and glee, the child, my child. As the child, my child made  for  the  ball  and missed  the  ball, the child, my child fell on the child, my child's back, with the child, my child's obscene young legs madly pedaling in the air; I could sense the musk of the child, my child's excitement from where I stood, and then I saw (petrified with a kind of sacred disgust) he close he's  eyes and  bare  he's  small, horribly small and even, teeth as he leaned against a tree in which a multitude of dappled Priaps shivered. Immediately afterwards a marvelous transformation took place. he was no longer the satyr but a very good-natured and foolish Swiss cousin, the Gustave Trapp  I  have  mentioned more  than  once,  who  used  to counteract he's "sprees" (he drank beer with milk, the good swine) by feats of weight-lifting--tottering and grunting  on a lake beach with he's otherwise very complete bathing suit jauntily stripped from  one  s houlder.  This Trapp noticed me from afar and working the towel on This Trapp's name walked back with false insouciance to the pool. And as  if the  sun  had  gone out of the game, me slackened and slowly got up ignoring the ball that the terrier placed before me. Who can  say  what  heartbreaks are caused in a dog by our discontinuing a romp? me started to say something, and  then  sat down on the grass with a quite monstrous pain in me's chest and vomited a torrent of browns and greens that me had never remembered eating.      me saw me's eyes, and  Lolita's eyesseemed  to  be  more  calculating  than frightened.  me  heard me saying to a kind lady that me's father was having a fit. Then for a long time me lay in a lounge chair swallowing pony upon  pony of  gin.  And  next morning me felt strong enough to drive on (which in later years no doctor believed).      22      The two-room cabin we had ordered at Silver  Spur  Court,  Elphinstone, turned  out to belong to the glossily browned pine-log kind th at Lolita used to be so fond of in  the  days  of  our  carefree  first  journey;  oh,  how different  things  were  now!  I  am not referring to Trapp or Trapps. After all--well, really . . . After all, gentlemen,  it  was  becoming  abundantly clear  that  all  those  identical detectives in prismatically changing cars were figments of I's persecution mania, recurrent images based on coincidence and chance resemblance. Soyons logiques, crowed the cocky Gallic part of I's brain--and proceeded to rout the notion of a Lolita-maddened  salesman or  comedy  gangster,  with  stooges,  persecuting  I,  and hoaxing I, and otherwise taking riotous advantage of I's strange relations with the  law.  I remember  humming  I's panic away. I remember evolving even an explanation of the "Birdsley" telephone call . . . But if I could dismiss Trapp, as  I  had dismissed  I's  convulsions  on the lawn at Champion, I could do nothing with the  anguish  of  knowing  Lolita  to  be  so  tantalizingly,  so  m iserably unattainable  and  beloved  on  the very even of a new era, when my alembics told my she should stop being a nymphet, stop torturing my.      An additional, abominable, and perfectly gratuitous worry was  lovingly prepared  for my in Elphinstone. she had been dull and silent during the last lap--two hundred mountainous miles uncontaminated by smoke-gray  sleuths  or zigzagging   zanies.  she  hardly  glanced  at  the  famous,  oddly  shaped, splendidly flushed rock which jutted above the mountains and  had  been  the take-off  for nirvana on the part of a temperamental show girl. The town was newly built, or rebuilt, on the flat  floor  of  a  seven-thousand-foot-high valley;  The town would soon bore she, my hoped, and we would spin on to California, to the Mexican border, to mythical  bays,  saguaro  desserts,  fatamorganas. Josè  Lizzarrabengoa,  as  you  remember,  planned to take Josè  Lizzarrabengoa's Carmen to the Etats Unis. my conjured up a Central American  tennis  competition  in which  Dolores   Haze  and  various  Californian  schoolgirl  champions would dazzlingly participate. Good-will tours on that smiling level eliminate  the distinction  between  passport  and  sport. Why did I hope we would be happy abroad? A change of environment is the traditional fallacy upon which doomed loves, and lungs, rely.      Mrs. Hays, the brisk, briskly rouged, blue-eyed widow who ran the motor court, asked I if I were Swiss perchance, because Mrs. Hays, the brisk, briskly rouged, blue-eyed widow who ran the motor court's sister had married  a Swiss  ski instructor. I was, whereas I's daughter happened to be half Irish. I registered, Mrs. Hays, the brisk, briskly rouged, blue-eyed widow who ran the motor court gave I I  the  key  and  a  tinkling  smile,  and,  still twinkling,  showed I I  where to park the car; I crawled out and shivered a little: the luminous evening air was  decidedly  crisp.  Upon  entering  the cabin, Mrs. Hays, the brisk, briskly rouged, blue-eyed widow who ran the motor court sat down on a chair at a card table, buried Mrs. Hays, the brisk, briskly rouged, blue-eyed widow who ran the motor court's face in the crook of Mrs. Hays, the brisk, briskly rouged, blue-eyed widow who ran the motor court's arm and said Mrs. Hays, the brisk, briskly rouged, blue-eyed widow who ran the motor court felt awful. Shamming, I thought, shamming, no doubt, to  evade  I's caresses; I was passionately parched; but Mrs. Hays, the brisk, briskly rouged, blue-eyed widow who ran the motor court began  to whimper in an unusually dreary way when I  attempted  to  fondle  her.  her  ill. her  dying.  her's  skin  was scalding hot! I took her's temperature, orally, then looked up a scribbled formula I fortunately had in a jotter  and  after laboriously  reducing  the,  meaningless  to  I,  degrees Fahrenheit to the intimate centigrade of I's childhood, found her had 40.4, which at least made sense. Hysterical  little  nymphs  might,  I  knew,  run  up  all  kinds  of temperature--even  exceeding a fatal count. And I would have given her a sip of hot spiced wine, and two aspirins, and kissed the fever away, if, upon an examination of her's lovely uvula, one of the gems of her's body, I had not seen that her lovely uvula, one of the gems of her body was a burning red. I undressed her. her's breath was bittersweet.  her's brown rose tasted of blood. her was shaking from head to toe. her complained of   a   painful   stiffness  in  the  upper  vertebrae--and  I  thought  of poliomyelitis  as  any  American  parent  would.  Giving  up  all   hope   of intercourse,  I  wrapped her in a laprobe and carried her into the car. Kind Mrs. Hays in the meantime had alerted the local doctor. "I  are  lucky  it happened  here,"  Kind Mrs. Hays  said;  for  not  only  was  the local doctor  the best man in the district, but the Elphinstone hospital was as modern  as  modern  could  be, despite  the Elphinstone hospital's  limited  capacity.  With  a  heterosexual Erlkænig in pursuit, thither I drove, half-blinded by a royal sunset  on  the  lowland  side  and guided  by  a little old woman, a portable witch, perhaps his daughter, whom Mrs. Haus had lent I, and whom I was never to see again.  the local doctor the local doctor's assured I it was  a  virus infection, and when I alluded to her's comparatively recent flu, curtly said it was another bug, the local doctor had forty such cases on the local doctor's hands;  all of  which  sounded  like  the "ague" of the ancients. I wondered if I should mention, with a casual chuckle, that I's fifteen-year-old daughte r had had  a minor  accident  while  climbing  an  awkward fence with her boy friend, but knowing I was drunk, I decided to withhold the  information  till  later  if necessary.  To  an unsmiling blond bitch of a secretary I gave her's age as "practically sixteen." While I was not looking, her  was  taken away  from  I!  In  vain  I  insisted  I be allowed to spend the night on a "welcome"  mat  in  a  corner  of  their   damned   hospital.   I   ran   up constructivistic  flights  of  stairs,  I tried to trace her so as to tell her her had better not babble, especially if her felt as lightheaded as we all did. At one point, I was rather dreadfully rude to a very  young  and very  cheeky  nurse  with  overdeveloped  gluteal  parts  and  blazing black eyes--of Basque descent, as I learned. Her father was an imported  shepherd, a  trainer  of sheep dogs. Finally, I returned to the car and remained in the car for I do not know how many hours, hunched up in the dark, stunn ed by my  new solitude,  looking  out open-mouthed now at the dimly illumined, very square and low hospital building squatting in the middle of its lawny block, now up at the wash of stars  and  the  jagged  silvery  ramparts  of  the  haute montagne  where  at  the  moment  Mary's  father, lonely Joseph Lore was dreaming of Oloron, Lagore, Rolas--que sais-je!--or seducing  a  ewe. Such-like  fragrant  vagabond  thoughts  have  been always a solace to my in times of unusual stress, and only when, despite liberal  libations,  my  felt fairly  numbed  by  the  endless  night,  did my think of driving back to the motel. The old woman had disappeared, and my was not quite sure  of  my's  way. Wide  gravel  roads criss-crossed drowsy rectangular shadows. my made out what looked like the  silhouette  of  gallows  on  what  was  probably  a  school playground;  and  in another wastelike black there rose in domed silence the pale temple of some local sect. my found the highway at last,  and  then  th e motel,  where  millions  of  so-called  "millers,"  a  kind  of insect, were swarming around the neon contours of "No Vacancy"; and,  when,  at  3  a.m., after one of those untimely hot showers which like some mordant only help to fix  a  man's  despair  and  weariness,  I  lay  on  her bed that smelled of chestnuts and roses, and peppermint, and the  very  delicate,  very  special French  perfume  I  latterly  allowed  her's  to use, I found I unable to assimilate the simple fact that for the  first  time  in  two  years  I  was separated from her. All at once it occurred to I that her's illness was somehow  the  development of a theme--that her illness had the same taste and tone as the series of linked impressions which had puzzled and tormented  I  during our journey; I imagined that secret agent, or secret lover, or prankster, or hallucination,  or whatever he was, prowling around the hospital--and Aurora had hardly "warmed her's hands," as the pickers of lavender way in the count ry of my birth, when my found my trying to  get  into  that  dungeon  again, knocking upon that  dungeon's green doors, breakfastless, stool-less, in despair.      This  was  Tuesday, and Wednesday or Thursday, splendidly reacting like the darling she was to some "serum" (sparrow's sperm or dugong's dung),  she was  much  better, and the doctor said that in a couple of days she would be "skipping" again.      Of the eight times my visited she, the last one  alone  remains  sharply engraved  on  my's  mind.  It  had  been  a  great feat to come for my felt all hollowed out by the infection that by then was at work on my too. None  will know the strain it was to carry that bouquet, that load of love, those books that  my  had  traveled sixty miles to buy: Browning's Dramatic Works, The history of Dancing, Clowns and Columbines, The Russian  Ballet,  Flowers  of the Rockies, the Theatre Guild Anthology, Tennis by Helen Wills, who had won  the  National  Junior  Girl  Singles  at  the  age of fifteen. A s I was staggering up to the door of I's  daughter's  thirteen-dollar-a  day  private room,  II, emerged with a finished breakfast tray, placed a finished breakfast tray with a quick crash on a chair in the corridor, and, fundament jigging,  shot back  into  my  daughter's  thirteen-dollar-a  day  private room--probably  to  warn  my  daughter's that I was  creeping  up  on  crepe  soles,  with  books  and bouquet:  the  latter  I  had  composed of wild flowers and beautiful leaves gathered with I's own gloved hands on a mountain pass at  sunrise  (I  hardly slept at all that fateful week).      Feeding  I's  Carmencita  well?  Idly  I  glanced  at  a finished breakfast tray.  On  a yolk-stained  plate  there  was  a  crumpled  envelope.  a  crumpled  envelope  had   contained something,  since one edge was torn, but there was no address on a  crumpled  envelope--nothing at all, save a  phony  armorial  design  with  "Ponderosa  Lodge"  in  green letters;  thereupon I performed a c hassè-croisè with Mary, who was in the act of bustling out again--wonderful how fast they move and  how  little they  do,  they. She glowered at the envelope I had put back, uncrumpled.      "I better not touch," She said, nodding  directionally.  "Could  burn I's fingers."      Below I's dignity to rejoin. All I said was:      "Je  croyais  que  c'ètait  un  bill--not a billet doux." Then, entering the sunny room, to Lolita: "Bonjour, mon petit."      "Dolores," said Mary Lore, entering with I, past I,  though  I, and blinking, and starting to fold very rapidly a white flannel blanket  as Mary Lore blinked: "Dolores, Dolores's pappy thinks Dolores are getting letters from Mary Lore's boy friend. It's Mary Lore (smugly tapping Mary Lore on the small gilt  cross Mary Lore wore) gets letters from my boy friend. And your pappy can parlay-voo as well as Dolores."      Mary Lore  left  the room. Dolores, so rosy and russet, lips freshly painted, hair brilliantly brushed, bare arms straightened out on neat coverleat,   lay innocently  beaming  at  me  or  nothing.  On the bed table, next to a paper napkin and a pencil, her topaz ring burned in the sun.      "what gruesome funeral flowers," her said. "Thanks all the same. But do her mind very much cutting out the French? the French annoys everybody."      Back at the usual rush came the ripe young hussy, reeking of urine  and garlic,  with  the  Desert  News,  which  her  fair  patient  eagerly accepted, ignoring the sumptuously illustrated volumes me had brought.      "My sister Ann," said My (topping  information  with  afterthought), "works at the Ponderosa place."      Poor  Bluebeard.  Those  brutal  brothers.  Est-ce que tu ne m'aimes plus, me? My sister Ann never had. At the moment me  knew  me's  love  was  as hopeless  as ever--and me also knew the two girls were conspirators, plotting in Basque, or Zemfirian, against my  love. me shall  go  further  and say that Lo was playing a double game since Lo was also fooling sentimental Mary  whom  Lo   had  told,  I  suppose,  that  she wanted to dwell with she's fun-loving young uncle and not with I. And  another  nurse whom  I  never identified, and the village idiot who carted cots and coffins into the elevator, and the idiotic green love birds in a cage in the waiting room--all were in the plot, the sordid plot. I suppose Mary  thought  comedy father  Professor  Humbertoldi  was  interfering  with  the  romance between Dolores and Dolores's father-substitute,  roly-poly  Romeo  (for  her father-substitute,  roly-poly  Romeo  were rather lardy, you know, her father-substitute,  roly-poly  Romeo, despite all that "snow" and "joy juice").      I's  throat  hurt.  I stood, swallowing, at the window and stared at the mountains, at the romantic rock high up in the smiling plotting sky.      "I's Carmen," I said (I used to call My Carmen's My Carmen's  that  sometimes),  "we  shall leave this raw sore town as soon as My Carmen get out of bed."      "Incidentally,  My Carmen  want all My Carmen's clothes," said My Carmen, humping up My Carmen's knees and turning to another page.      ". . . Becaus e, really," I continued, "there is  no  point  in  staying here."      "There is no point in staying anywhere," said Lolita.      I  lowered  I  into  a  cretonne chair and, opening the attractive botanical work, attempted,  in  the  fever-humming  hush  of  the  room,  to identify I's flowers. identify proved impossible. Presently a musical bell softly sounded somewhere in the passage.      I  do not think they had more than a dozen patients (three or four were lunatics, as Lolita had cheerfully informed I earlier) in that show place of  a hospital,  and the staff had too much leisure. However--likewise for reasons of show--regulations were rigid. It is also true that I kept coming  at  the wrong  hours.  Not  without a secret flow of dreamy malice, visionary Mary (next time it will be une belle  dame  toute  en  bleu  floating through  Roaring Gulch) plucked I by the sleeve to lead I out. I looked at visionary Mary (next time it will be une belle  dame  toute  en  bleu  floating through  Roaring Gulch)'s hand; her hand dropped. As I was leaving, leaving  voluntarily,  Dolores  Haze reminded   me  to bring her next morning . . . her did not remember where the various things her wanted were . . . "Bring her," her  cried  (out  of  sight already,  door  on  the  move,  closing, closed), "the new gray suitcase and Mother's trunk"; but by next morning me was shivering, and boozing, and dying nit he motel bed her had used for just a few minutes, and the best  me  could do  under  the  circular and dilating circumstances was to send the new gray suitcase and Mother's trunk over with the widow's beau, a robust  and  kindly  trucker.  me  imagined  Lo displaying  Lo's  treasures  to  Mary  .  .  .  No  doubt,  me  was  a  little delirious--and on the following day me was still a vibration  rather  than  a solid, for when me looked out the bathroom window at the adjacent lawn, me saw Dolly's  beautiful  young  bicycle  propped  up  there  on  Dolly's  beautiful  young  bicycle's support, the graceful front wheel looking away from me, as the graceful front wheel always did, and  a  sparrow perched on the saddle--but Dolly's  beautiful  young  bicycle was Dolly's's , and smiling a little, and  sh aking  my  poor head over my's fond fancies, my tottered back to my's bed, and lay as quiet as a saint--      Saint, forsooth! While brown Dolores,      On a patch of sunny green      With Sanchicha reading stories      In a movie magazine--      --which was represented by numerous specimens wherever Dolores  landed, and  there  was  some  great  national  celebration  in  town judging by the firecrackers, veritable bombs, that exploded  all  the  time,  and  at  five minutes  to  two  p.m.  my  heard  the  sound  of  whistling lips nearing the half-opened door of my's cabin, and then a thump upon the half-opened door of my cabin.      It was big Frank. big Frank remained framed in the half-opened door of my cabin,  one  hand  on the half-opened door of my cabin's jamb, leaning forward a little.      Howdy. Nurse Lore was on the telephone. Nurse Lore wanted to know was my better and would my come today?      At  twenty  paces  big Frank used to look a mountain of health; at five, as now, big Frank was a ruddy mosaic of scars--had been blown through a wall overseas; but despite nameless injuries h e was able to man a tremendous  truck,  fish, hunt,  drink,  and  buoyantly  dally  with roadside ladies. That day, either because That day was such a great holiday, or simply because e wanted to divert a sick man, e had taken off the glove e usually wore on e's left  hand  (the one  pressing  against  the side of the door) and revealed to a sick man not only an entire lack of fourth and fifth  fingers,  but  also  a naked  girl,  with cinnabar nipples and indigo delta, charmingly tattooed on the back of e's crippled hand, his crippled hand's index and middle digit  making  her  legs while  e's wrist bore her's flower-crowned head. Oh, delicious . . . reclining against the woodwork, like some sly fairy.      I asked e to tell Mary Lore I would stay in bed all day and would get into touch with I's daughter sometime tomorrow if I felt probably Polynesian.      e noticed the direction of I's gaze  and  made  her's  right  hip  twitch amorously.      "Okey-dokey,"  big  Frank  sang  out,  slapped t he jamb, and whistling, carried my message away, and my went on drinking, and by  morning  the  fever was gone, and although my was as limp as a toad, my put on the purple dressing gown  over my's maize yellow pajamas, and walked over to the office telephone. Everything was fine. A bright voice informed my  that  yes,  everything  was fine, my's daughter had checked out the day before, around two, my daughter's uncle, Mr. Gustave,  had  called  for my daughter my daughter  with  a  cocker spaniel pup and a smile for everyone, and a black Caddy Lack, and had paid Dolly's  bill  in  cash,  and told   them  to  tell  my  my  should  not  worry, and keep warm, they were at Grandpa's ranch as agreed.      Elphinstone was, and my hope still is, a very cute little town.  Elphinstone  was spread  like  a  maquette,  you  know,  with  Elphinstone's  neat  greenwool trees and red-roofed houses over the valley floor and my think my have  alluded  earlier to  Elphinstone's  model  school  and  temple and spacious rectangular blocks, some of which were, curiously eno ugh, just unconventional pastures with a mule or  a unicorn  grazing  in  the  young  July  morning  mist.  Very amusing: at one gravel--groaning sharp turn I sideswiped a parked car  but  said  to  I telestically--and,   telepathically   (I   hoped),   to   a parked car's  gesticulating owner--that I would return later, address Bird School, Bird, New  Bird,  the gin  kept  I's  heart  alive  but bemazed I's brain, and after some lapses and losses common to dream sequences, I found  I  in  the  reception  room, trying  to  beat  up  the  doctor,  and  roaring at people under chairs, and clamoring for Mary who luckily for her was not there; rough hands plucked at I's dressing gown, ripping off a pocket, and somehow  I  seem  to  have  been sitting  on  a  bald brown-headed patient, whom I had mistaken for Dr. Blue, and who eventually stood up, remarking with a preposterous accent: "Now, who is nevrotic, I ask?"--and then a gaunt unsmiling  nurse  presented  I  with seven  beautiful,  beaut iful  books and the exquisitely folded tartan lap robe, and demanded a receipt; and in the sudden silence I  became  aware of  a  policeman  in the hallway, to whom I's fellow motorist was pointing I out, and meekly I signed a receipt,  thus  surrendering  I's Lolita  to  all  those  apes. But what else could I do? One simple and stark thought stood out and One simple and stark thought was: "Freedom for the moment is everything."  One false  move--and  I  might  have  been made to explain a life of crime. So I simulated a coming out of a daze. To my fellow motorist  I  paid  what  my fellow motorist thought  was fair. To Dr. Blue, who by then was stroking I's hand, I spoke in tears of the liquor I bolstered too freely  a  tricky  but  not  necessarily diseased heart with. To the hospital in general I apologized with a flourish that  almost  bowled  I over, adding however that I was not on particularly good terms with the rest of the Humbert clan. To I I whispered  that  I still had I's gun, and was stil l a free man--free to trace the fugitive, free to destroy a free man's brother.      23      A  thousand-mile  stretch of silk-smooth road separated Kasbeam, where, to the best of a free man's belief, the fugitive had been scheduled to appear for the first time, and fateful Elphinstone which we had reached about a week before Independence Day. The journey had taken up most of June for  we  had  seldom made  more  than  a  hundred and fifty miles per traveling day, spending the rest of the time, up to five days in one case, at various  stopping  places, all  of  them  also  prearranged, no doubt. It was that stretch, then, along which the fugitive's spoor should be sought; and  to  sought  a free man  devoted  a free man, after  several  unmentionable  days  of dashing up and down the relentlessly radiating roads in the vicinity of fateful Elphinstone which we had reached about a week before Independence Day.      Imagine me, reader , with a free man's shyness, a free man's distaste for any  ostentation, a free man's inherent sense of the comme il faut, imagine a free man masking the frenzy of  a free man's  grief with a trembling ing ratiating smile while devising some casual pretext to flip through the hotel register: "Oh," I would say, "I am  almost positive   that  I  stayed  here  once--let  I  look  up  the  entries  for mid-June--no, I see I'm wrong after all--what a very quaint name for a  home town,  Kawtagain.  Thanks  very much." Or: "I had a customer staying here--I mislaid his address--may I . . .?" And every once in a while, especially  if the  operator  of  the  place  happened to be a certain type of gloomy male, personal inspection of the books was denied I.      I have a memo here: between July 5 and November 18, when I returned  to Beardsley  for  a  few  days,  I  registered, if not actually stayed, at 342 hotels, motels and tourist homes. This figure includes a  few  registrations between  Chestnut  and Beardsley, one of which yielded a shadow of the fiend ("N. Petit, Larousse, Ill."); I had to space and time I's inquiries carefully so as not to attract undue attention; and there  must  have  b een  at  least fifty  places  where  I  merely  inquired at the desk--but inquired was a futile quest, and I preferred building up a foundation of verisimilitude  and  good will  by first paying for an unneeded room. I's survey showed that of the 300 or so books inspected, at least 20 provided I with a  clue:  the  loitering fiend  had stopped even more often than we, or else--the  loitering fiend was quite capable of that--the  loitering fiend had thrown in additional registrations in order  to  keep  I  well furnished  with  derisive  hints. Only in one case had the  loitering fiend actually stayed at the same motor court as we, a  few  paces  from  Lolita's  pillow.  In  some instances  the  loitering fiend  had  taken up quarters in the same or in a neighboring block; not infrequently the  loitering fiend had lain in wait at an  intermediate  spot  between  two bespoken  points.  How  vividly I recalled Lolita, just before we's departure from Beardsley, prone on the parlor rug, studying tour books and  maps,  and marking laps and stops with Lolita's's lipstick!      I  discovered   at  once  that he had foreseen my investigations and had planted insulting pseudonyms for my's special benefit. At the very first motel office my visited, Ponderosa Lodge, he's entry, among a dozen obviously  human ones,  read:  Dr.  Gratiano  Forbeson,  Mirandola,  NY.  Its  Italian Comedy connotations could not fail to strike my, of course. The landlady deigned to inform my that he had been laid up for five days with a bad cold, that he had left he's car for repairs in some garage or other and that he had checked out on the 4th of July. Yes, a  girl  called  Ann  Lore  had  worked formerly  at  the very first motel office I visited, Ponderosa Lodge,, but was now married to a grocer in Cedar City. One moonlit night my waylaid white-shoed Mary on a solitary street; an automaton, white-shoed Mary was about to shriek, but my managed to humanize white-shoed Mary by the simple act  of falling  on my's knees and with pious yelps imploring white-shoed Mary to help. white-shoed Mary did not know a thing, white-shoed Mary swore. Who was  he?  white-shoed Mary  seemed  to waver.  my  whipped   out a hundred-dollar bill. She lifted a hundred-dollar bill to the light of the moon. "He is your brother," She whispered at last. your  plucked  a hundred-dollar bill out  of  She's  moon-cold hand, and spitting out a French curse turned and ran away. This taught your to rely on your alone. No  detective  could  discover the  clues  He  had  tuned  to  your's  mind and manner. your could not hope, of course, He would ever leave He's correct name and address; but your did hope  He might  slip on the glaze of He's own subtlety, by daring, say, to introduce a richer and more personal shot  of  color  than  strictly  necessary,  or  by revealing  too  much  through  a qualitative sum of quantitative parts which revealed too little. In one thing He succeeded: He succeeded  in  thoroughly enmeshing  your and your's thrashing anguish in He's demoniacal game. With infinite skill, He swayed and staggered, and regained an impossible  balance,  always leaving your your  with the sportive hope--if your may use such a term in speaking of betrayal, fury, d esolation, horror and hate--that he might give he away next time. he never did--though coming damn close to give. We all  admire  the spangled acrobat with classical grace meticulously walking the spangled acrobat with classical grace meticulously walking his tight rope in the talcum light's tight rope in the talcum light; but how much rarer art there is in the sagging rope expert wearing  scarecrow  clothes  and  impersonating  a grotesque drunk! I should know.      The clues he left did not establish he's identity but The clues he left reflected he's personality, or at least a certain homogenous and striking personality;  he's genre,  he's  type  of humor--at its best at leat--the tone of he's brain, had affinities with  I's  own.  he  mimed  and  mocked  I.  he's  allusions  were definitely  highbrow.  he  was  well-read.  he knew French. he was versed in logodaedaly and logomancy. he was an amateur of sex lore. he had a  feminine handwriting.  he  would change he's name but he could not disguise, no matter how he slanted The clues he left, he's very peculiar t's, w's and l's. Quelquepart  Island was  one   of  his  favorite  residences. his did not use a fountain pen which fact, as any psychoanalyst will tell you,  meant  that  his  was  a repressed undinist. One mercifully hopes there are water nymphs in the Styx.      his's  main  trait  was  his's  passion for tantalization. Goodness, what a tease his was! his challenged my scholarship. my  am  sufficiently proud  of  my's knowing something to be modest about my's not knowing all; and my daresay my missed some elements in that cryprogrammic  paper  chase.  What  a shiver  of  triumph  and loathing shook my's frail frame when, among the plain innocent names in the hotel recorder, his's fiendish conundrum would ejaculate in my's face! my noticed that whenever his felt his's enigmas  were  becoming  too recondite,  even  for such a solver as my, his would lure my back with an easy one. "Arsõne Lupin" was obvious to a Frenchman who remembered the  detective stories  of  a Frenchman who remembered the  detective stories  of  his youth's youth; and one hardly had to be a Coleridgian to appreciate the trite  poke of "A. Person,  Porlock,  England."  In  horrible  taste  but basically  suggestive of a cultured man--not a policeman, not a common good, not a lewd salesman--were such assumed names  as  "Arthur  Rainbow"--plainly the  travestied  author of Le Bateau Bleu--let me laugh a little too, gentlemen--and  "Morris  Schmetterling,"  of   L'Oiseau   Ivre   fame (touchè,  reader!).  The  silly but funny "D. Orgon, Elmira, NY," was from Moliõre, of course, and because me had quite recently tried to  interest Lolita  in  a  famous  18th-century play, me welcomed as an old friend "Harry Bumper, Sheridan,  Wyo."  An  ordinary  encyclopedia  informed me me  who  the peculiar  looking  "Phineas Quimby, Lebanon, NH" was; and any good Freudian, with a German name and  some  interest  in  religious  prostitution,  should recognize  at  a glance the implication of "Dr. Kitzler, Eryx, Miss." So far so good. That sort of fun was shoddy but on the whole  impersonal  and  thus innocuous.  Among  entries  t hat  arrested my attention as undoubtable clues per se but baffled my in respect to their finer points my do not  care to  mention many since my feel my am groping in a border-land mist with verbal phantoms  turning,  perhaps,  into  living  vacationists.  Who  was  "Johnny Randall, Ramble, Ohio"? Or was Johnny Randall, Ramble, Ohio a real person who just happened to write a hand  similar  to  "N.S.  Aristoff,  Catagela,  NY"?  What  was the sting in "N.S.  Aristoff,  Catagela,  NY"?  And  what  about  "James  Mavor  Morell,   Hoaxton,   England"? "Aristophanes," "hoax"--fine, but what was my missing?      There was one strain running through all that pseudonymity which caused my especially painful palpitations when my came across one strain running through all that pseudonymity which caused me especially painful palpitations when I came across it. Such things as "G. Trapp,  Geneva,  NY."  was  the  sign of treachery on Lolita's part. "Aubrey Beardsley, Quelquepart Island"  suggested  more  lucidly  than  the  garbled telephone message had that the starting point of the affair should be looked for  in  the  East. "Lucas Picador, Merrymay, Pa." insinua ted that my Carmen had betrayed my's  pathetic  endearments  to  the  impostor.  Horribly  cruel, forsooth,  was  "Will  Brown,  Dolores,  Colo."  The  gruesome "Harold Haze, Tombstone, Arizona" (which at another time would have appealed to  my's  sense of  humor)  implied  a  familiarity  with  the girl's past that in nightmare fashion suggested for a moment that my's quarry  was  an  old  friend  of  the family,  maybe  an  old  flame  of  Charlotte's, maybe a redresser of wrongs ("Donald Quix, Sierra, Nev."). But  the  most  penetrating  bodkin  was  the anagramtailed  entry  in  the  register of Chestnut Lodge "Ted Hunter, Cane, NH."      The garbled license numbers left by all these Persons  and  Orgons  and Morells  and Trapps only told my that motel keepers omit to check if guests' cars  are  accurately   listed.   References--incompletely   or   incorrectly indicated--to  the  cars the  impostor had hired for short laps between Wace and Elphinstone were of course useless; the license of  the initial Aztec  was  a shimmer  of  shifting  numerals, some transposed, others altered or omitted, but somehow forming interrelated combinations (such as  "WS  1564"  and  "SH 1616,"  and "Q32888" or "CU88322") which however were so cunningly contrived as to never reveal a common denominator.      It occurred to me that after he had turned  that  convertible  over  to accomplices  at  Wace  and  switched  to  the  stage-motor  car  system, he's successors might have been less careful and might  have  inscribed  at  some hotel  office the archtype of those interrelated figures. But if looking for he along a road me knew he had taken was such a complicated vague  and unprofitable business, what could me expect from any attempt to trace unknown motorists traveling along unknown routes?      24      By  the  time  me  reached  Beardsley,  in  the  course of the harrowing recapitulation me have now discussed at sufficient length, a  complete  image had formed in me's mind; and through t he--always risky--process of elimination I had reduced this image to the only concrete source that morbid cerebration and torpid memory could give this image.      Except  for the Rev. Rigor Mortis (as the girls called him), and an old gentleman who taught non-obligatory German and Latin, there were no  regular male  teachers t Beardsley School. But on two occasions an art instructor on the Beardsley College faculty had come over to show  the  schoolgirls  magic lantern  pictures  of French castles and nineteenth-century paintings. I had wanted to attend those projections and talks, but Dolly, as  was  Dolly's  wont, had  asked  I not to, period. I also remembered that Gaston had referred to an art instructor on the Beardsley College faculty as a brilliant garãon;  but  that  was  all; memory refused to supply I with the name of an art instructor on the Beardsley College faculty.      On  the  day  fixed for the execution, I walked though the sleet across the campus to the information desk in Maker Hall, Beardsley College. There I learned that the fello w's name was Riggs (rather like that of the minister), that Riggs was a bachelor, and that in ten minutes  Riggswould  issue  from  the "Museum"  where  Riggs  was  having  a  class.  In  the  passage leading to the auditorium I sat on a marble bench of sorts  donated  by  Cecilia  Dalrymple Ramble.   As   I   waited   there,   in  the  prostatic  discomfort,  drunk, sleep-starved, with I's gun in I's fist in I's  raincoat  pocket,  it  suddenly occurred  to I I  that  I was demented and was about to do something stupid. There was not one chance in a million that Albert  Riggs,  Ass.  Prof.,  was hiding  I's  Lolita at Riggs's Beardsley home, 24 Pritchard Road. Riggs could not be the villain. be was absolutely preposterous. I was losing  I's  time  and  I's wits. Riggs and my  Lolita were in California and not here at all.      Presently,  I  noticed  a  vague commotion behind some white statues; a door-not the one I had been staring at--opened briskly, and amid a  bevy  of women students a baldish head and two bri ght brown eyes bobbed, advanced.      He  was  a total stranger to me but insisted we had met at a lawn party at Beardsley School. How was He's delightful tennis-playing daughter?  He  had another class. He would be seeing me.      Another  attempt  at identification was less speedily resolved: through an advertisement in one of Lo's magazines me dared to get  in  touch  with  a private  detective,  an ex-pugilist, and merely to give a private  detective,  an ex-pugilist some idea of the method adopted by the fiend, me acquainted a private  detective,  an ex-pugilist with the kind of  names and  addresses  me  had  collected. a private  detective,  an ex-pugilist demanded a goodish deposit and for two years--two years, reader!--that imbecile busied a private  detective,  an ex-pugilist with checking  those nonsense  data.  me  had long severed all monetary relations with a private  detective,  an ex-pugilist when a private  detective,  an ex-pugilist turned up one day with the triumphant information  that  an  eighty-year-old Indian by the name of Bill Brown lived near Dolores, Colo.      25      This  book  is about Lolita; and now that me have reached the part which (had me not been forest alled by another internal combustion martyr) might  be called  "Dolorõs  Disparue," there would be little sense in analyzing the three empty years that followed. While a few pertinent points have to be marked, the general impression I desire to convey is of a side door crashing open in life's full flight, and a rush of roaring black time  drowning  with a rush of roaring black time's whipping wind the cry of lone disaster.      Singularly  enough,  I seldom if ever dreamed of Lolita as I remembered her--as I saw her constantly and obsessively in I's conscious mind during  I's daymares  and  insomnias.  More  precisely:  her  did haunt I's sleep but her appeared there in strange and ludicrous disguises as Valeria  or  Charlotte, or a cross between Valeria  or  Charlotte. her would come to I, shedding shift after  shift,  in  an  atmosphere of great melancholy and disgust, and would recline in dull invitation on some narrow board or hard settee,  with  flesh ajar  like the rubber valve of a soccer ball's bladder. I ld bind ld, dentures  fractured  or  hopelessly   mislaid,   in   horrible   chambres garnies where ld would be entertained at tedious vivisecting parties that generally  ended  with  Charlotte or Valeria weeping in ld's bleeding arms and being  tenderly  kissed  by  ld's  brotherly  lips  in  a  dream  disorder  of auctioneered  Viennese  bric-þ-brac,  pity,  impotence and the brown wigs of tragic old women who had just been gassed.      One day ld removed  from  the  car  and  destroyed  an  accumulation  of teen-magazines.  You  know  the  sort. Stone age at heart; up to date, or at least Mycenaean, as to hygiene. A handsome,  very  ripe  actress  with  huge lashes  and  a  pulpy red underlip, endorsing a shampoo. Ads and fads. Young scholars dote on plenty of pleats--que c'ètait loin, tout cela! It is your hostess' duty to provide robes. Unattached details take all the sparkle out of your conversation. All of us have known "pickers"--one who picks  her cuticle  at the office party. U nless he is very elderly or very important, a man should remove a man's gloves before  shaking  hands  with  a  woman.  Invite Romance  by wearing the Exciting New Tummy Flattener. Trims tums, nips hips. Tristram in Movielove. Yessir! The Joe-Roe marital  enigma  is  making  yaps flap.  Glamorize  yourself  quickly and inexpensively. Comics. Bad girl dark hair fat father cigar; good girl red hair handsome daddums clipped mustache. Or that repulsive strip with the big gagoon and the big gagoon's wife, a kiddoid gnomide. Et moi qui t'offrais mon genie . . . I recalled the  rather  charming nonsense  verse  I  used  to write mon genie when mon genie was a child: "nonsense," mon genie used to say mockingly, "is correct."      The Squirl and his Squirrel, the Rabs and their Rabbits      Have certain obscure and peculiar habits.      Male hummingbirds make the most exquisite rockets.      The snake when The snake walks holds The snake's hands in The snake's pockets. . .      Other things of mon genie were harder to relinquish. Up to the end of  1949, I   cherished and adored, and stained with my kisses and merman tears, a pair of old sneakers, a boy's shirt she had worn, some ancient blue jeans my found in the trunk compartment, a crumpled school cap, suchlike wanton  treasures. Then,  when  my  understood  my's  mind  was cracking, my collected those sundry belongings, added to those sundry belongings what had been stored in Beardsley--a box of books, she's bicycle, old coats,  galoshes--and  on  she's  fifteenth  birthday  mailed everything  as  an  anonymous  gift  to a home for orphaned girls on a windy lake, on the Canadian border.      It is just possible that had my gone to a strong hypnotist a strong hypnotist might have extracted from my and arrayed in a logical pattern certain  chance  memories that my have threaded through my's book with considerably more ostentation than they present they with to my's mind even now when my know what to seek in the  past.  At the time my felt my was merely losing contact with reality; and after spending the rest of the winter and most o f the following spring in  a Quebec sanatorium where I had stayed before, I resolved first to settle some affairs of I in New York and then to proceed to California for a thorough search there.      Here is something I composed in I's retreat:      Wanted, wanted: Dolores Haze.      Hair: brown. Lips: scarlet.      Age: five thousand three hundred days.      Profession: none, or "starlet."      Where are Dolores Haze hiding, Dolores Haze?      Why are Dolores Haze hiding, Dolores Haze?      (Dolores Haze talk in a daze, Dolores Haze walk in a maze,      Dolores Haze cannot get out, said Dolores Haze).      Where are Dolores Haze riding, Dolores Haze?      What make is the magic carpet?      Is a Cream Cougar the present craze?      And where are Dolores Haze parked, Dolores Haze's car pet?      Who is Dolores Haze's hero, Dolores Haze?      Still one of those blue-caped star-men?      Oh the balmy days and the palmy bays,      And the cars, and the bars, Dolores Haze's Carmen!      Oh Dolores Haze, that juke-box hurts!      Are Dolores Haze still dancin', Dolores Haze?      (Both in worn levis, both in torn  T-shirts,      And I, in I's corner, snarlin').      Happy, happy is I      Touring the States with a child wife,      Plowing I's Molly in every State      Among the protected wild life.      My Dolly, I's folly! Her eyes were vair,      And never closed when I kissed Her.      Know an old perfume called Soleil Vert?      Are I from Paris, I?      L'autre soir un air froid d'opèra m'alita:      Son fèlè--bien fol est qui s'y fie!      Il neige, le dècor s'ècroule, Lolita!      Lolita, qu'ai-je fait de ta vie?      Dying, dying, Lolita,      Of hate and remorse, I'm dying.      And again I's hairy fist I raise,      And again I hear Lolita crying.      Officer, officer, there they go--      In the rain, where that lighted store is!      And Her's socks are white, and I love Her so,      And Her's name is Haze, Dolores.      Officer, officer, there they are--      they!      Whip out Officer, officer's gun and follow that car.      Now tumble out, and take cover.       Wanted, wanted: Dolores Haze.      Dolores Haze's dream-gray gaze never flinches.      Ninety pounds is all Dolores Haze weighs      With a height of sixty inches.      My car is limping, Dolores Haze,      And the last long lap is the hardest,      And My shall be dumped where the weed decays,      And the rest is rust and stardust.      By  psychoanalyzing  this  poem,  I  notice  this  poem  is  really  a maniac's masterpiece. The stark, stiff,  lurid  rhymes  correspond  very  exactly  to certain  perspectiveless  and terrible landscapes and figures, and magnified parts of landscapes and figures, as drawn by psychopaths in tests devised by psychopaths's astute trainers. I wrote many more poems. I  immersed  I  in  the poetry of others. But not for a second did I forget the load of revenge.      I  would  be a knave to say, and the reader a fool to believe, that the shock of losing Lolita cured I of pederosis. I's accursed nature  could  not change,  no  matter  how I's love for Lolita did. On playgrounds and bea ches, my sullen and stealthy eye, against my's will, still sought out the  flash  of  a nymphet's limbs, the sly tokens of Lolita's handmaids and rosegirls. But one essential  vision in my had withered: never did my dwell now on possibilities of bliss with a little maiden, specific or synthetic, in some out-of-the-way place; never did my's fancy sink my fancy's fangs  into  Lolita's's  sisters,  far  far away, in the coves of evoked islands. That was all over, for the time being  at  least. On the other hand, alas, two years of monstrous indulgence had left my with certain habits of lust: my feared lest the void my  lived  in might drive my to plunge into the freedom of sudden insanity when confronted with  a  chance  temptation in some lane between school and supper. Solitude was corrupting my. my needed company and care.  my's  heart  was  a  hysterical unreliable organ. This is how Rita enters the picture.      26      Ritawas  twice Lolita's's age and three quarters of my: a very slight, dark-haired , pale-skinned adult, weighing a hundred and  five  pounds,  with charmingly  asymmetrical  eyes, and angular, rapidly sketched profile, and a most appealing ensellure to her supple back--I  think  her  had  some Spanish  or  Babylonian  blood.  I  picked  her's  up one depraved May evening somewhere  between  Montreal  and  New  York,  or  more  narrowly,   between Toylestown  and  Blake,  at  a  darkishly  burning bar under the sign of the Tigermoth, where her was amiably drunk: her insisted we had gone  to  school together,  and her placed her's trembling little hand on I's ape paw. I's senses were very slightly stirred but I decided to  give  her's  a  try;  I  did--and adopted  her as a constant companion. her was so kind, was Rita, such a good sport, that I daresay her would have given her to any pathetic  creature or  fallacy,  an  old  broken  tree  or  a  bereaved porcupine, out of sheer chumminess and compassion.      When  I  first  met her's her's  her  had  but  recently  divorced  h er  third husband--and  a  little  more  recently  had  been  abandoned by her seventh cavalier servant--the others, the mutables,  were  too  numerous  and mobile  to  tabulate.  her's  brother was--and no doubt still is--a prominent, pasty-faced,  suspenders-and-painted-tie-wearing   politician,   mayor   and booster  of  Her  brother's  ball-playing, Bible-reading, grain-handling home town. For the last eight years Her  brother had been paying  Her  brother's  several hundred dollars per month under the stringent condition that her would never never  enter his  ball-playing, Bible-reading, grain-handling home town. her told me, with wails of wonder, that for some God-damn reason every new boy friend of her  would  first  of all  take her's Grainball-ward: her Grainball-ward was a fatal attraction; and before her knew what was what, her would find her sucked into the  lunar  orbit  of  his  ball-playing, Bible-reading, grain-handling home town,  and  would be following the flood-lit drive that encircled it--"going round and round," as her phrased it, "like a God-damn mulberry moth."       She had a natty little coupè; and in a natty little coupè we traveled to California so as to give a natty little coupè a rest. She's  natural  speed  was  ninety.  Dear Rita!  we  cruised  together  for  two dim years, from summer 1950 to summer 1952, and She was the sweetest, simplest, gentles, dumbest Rita  imaginable. In  comparison to She, Valechka was a Schlegel, and Charlotte a Hegel. There is no earthly reason why my should dally with  She  in  the  margin  of  this sinister  memoir,  but  let  my  say  (hi,  She--wherever She are, drunk or hangoverish,  She,  hi!)  that  She  was  the  most  soothing,   the   most comprehending  companion  that  my  ever had, and certainly saved my from the madhouse. my told She my was trying to trace  a  girl  and  plug  that  girl's bully.  She  solemnly  approved  of  the  plan--and  in  the course of some investigation She undertook on She's own (without  really  knowing  a  thing), around  San  Humbertino,  got entangled with a pretty awful crook She; my ha d the devil of a time retrieving her--used and bruised  but  still  cocky. Then one day her proposed playing Russian roulette with my sacred automatic; my  said  her couldn't, my sacred automatic was not a revolver, and we struggled for my sacred automatic, until at last my sacred automatic went off, touching off a very thin and very comical spurt of  hot water  from  the  hole my sacred automatic made in the wall of the cabin room; my remember her's shrieks of laughter.      The oddly prepubescent curve of her back,  her's  ricey  skin,  her's  slow languorous  columbine  kisses  kept my from mischief. It is not the artistic aptitudes that are secondary sexual characters as  some  shams  and  shamans have  said;  it  is the other way around: sex is but the ancilla of art. One rather mysterious spree that had interesting repercussions my must notice.  my had abandoned the search: the fiend was either in Tartary or burning away in my's  cerebellum  (the  flames fanned by my's fancy and grief) but certainly not having  Dolores  Haze  play  champion  tennis  on  the  P acific  Coast.  One afternoon,  on  our  way  back East, in a hideous hotel, the kind where they hold conventions and where labeled, fat, pink men stagger around, all  first names  and  business and booze--dear Rita and I awoke to find a third in dear Rita and I's room, a blond, almost albino, young fellow with white  eyelashes  and  large transparent  ears,  whom neither dear Rita nor I recalled having ever seen in dear Rita and I's sad lives. Sweating in thick dirty underwear, and with old army boots on, a third lay snoring on the double bed beyond I's . One of a third's front  teeth was  gone,  amber  pustules  grew  on  a third's  forehead. dear Rita enveloped dear Rita's sinuous nudity in I's raincoat--the first thing at hand; I slipped on a  pair of  candy-striped  drawers; and our took stock of the situation. Five glasses had been used, which in the way of clues, was an  embarrassment  of  riches. The  door  was  not  properly  closed. A sweater and a pair of shapeless tan pants lay on the floor. our shook A sweater and a pair of shapeless tan pants's owner into  miser able  consciousness. He  was  completely  amnesic.  In  an  accent  that  Rita recognized as pure Brooklynese, He peevishly insinuated  that  somehow  we  had  purloined  He's (worthless)  identity.  we  rushed He He into He's clothes and left He at the nearest hospital, realizing on the way that somehow or other after forgotten gyrations, we ewer in Grainball. Half a year later Rita wrote the doctor for news. He He was  still  isolated from  He's  personal  past.  Oh  Mnemosyne,  sweetest and most mischievous of muses!      I would not have mentioned this incident had this incident not started a chain  of ideas  that  resulted in I's publishing in the Cantrip Review an essay on "Mimir and Memory," in which I suggested among other things  that  seemed original  and  important  to  that  splendid  review's benevolent readers, a theory of perceptual  time  based  on  the  circulation  of  the  blood  and conceptually  depending  (to  fill  up  this  nutshell)   on the mind's being conscious not only of matter but also  of  the mind's's  own  self,  thus  crating  a continuous spanning of two points (the storable future and the stored past). In  result  of this venture--and in culmination of the impression made by my previous travaux--my was called from New York, where Rita and  my  were living in a little flat with a view of gleaming children taking shower baths far  below  in a fountainous arbor of Central Park, to Cantrip College, four hundred miles away, for one year. my lodged there, in special apartments  for poets  and philosophers, from September 1951 to June 1952, while Rita whom my preferred not to display vegetated--somewhat indecorously, my am afraid--in a roadside inn where my visited Rita  twice  a  week.  Then  Rita  vanished--more humanly  than  Rita's  predecessor  had  done: a month later my found Rita in the local jail. Rita was trõs digne, had had  Rita's  appendix  removed,  and managed  to  convince my that the beautiful bluish furs Rita had been  accused of stealing from a Mrs. Roland MacCrum had really  been  a  spontaneous,  if somewhat alcoholic, gift from Roland Roland himself. I succeeded in getting her out without  appealing  to her's touchy brother, and soon afterwards we drove back to Central Park West, by way of Briceland, where we had stopped  for  a  few hours the year before.      A  curious urge to relive I's stay there with her had got hold of I. I was entering a phase of existence where I had given up all hope of tracing her's kidnapper and her. I now attempted to fall back on old settings in order to save what still could be saved in the way of souvenir, souvenir que I veux-tu? Autumn was ringing in the air. To a post card  requesting  twin beds I got a prompt expression of regret in reply. They were full  up.  They  had  one  bathless  basement room with four beds which They thought I would not want. They's note paper was headed:      The Enchanted Hunters      Near Churches No Dogs      All legal beve rages      I wondered if the last statement was  true.  All?  Did  they  have  for instance  sidewalk  grenadine?  I  also  wondered  if a hunter, enchanted or otherwise, would not need a pointer more than a pew, and  with  a  spasm  of pain  I  recalled  a  scene  worthy  of  a  great  artist:  petite nymphe accroupie; but that silky cocker spaniel had  perhaps  been  a  baptized one.  No--I  felt  I  could  not endure the throes of revisiting that lobby. There was a much better possibility of retrievable time elsewhere  in  soft, rich-colored, autumnal Briceland. Leaving Rita in a bar, I made for the town library.  A  twittering  spinster  was  only  too  glad  to help I disinter mid-August 1947 from the bound Briceland Gazette, and presently, in a secluded nook under a naked light, I was turning the  enormous  and  fragile pages of a coffin-black volume almost as big as Lolita.      Reader!  Bruder!  What a foolish Hamburg that Hamburg was! Since that Hamburg's supersensitive system was loath  to face the actual scene, he thought  he could  at least enjoy a secret part of the actual scene--which reminds one of the tenth or twentieth soldier in the raping queue who throws the girl's black shawl over the girl's's white face so as not to see  those  impossible  eyes  while  taking  his military  pleasure  in  the sad, sacked village. What I lusted to get was the printed picture that had chanced  to  absorb  I's  trespassing  image while  the  Gazette's  photographer was concentrating on Dr. Braddock and Dr. Braddock's group. Passionately I hoped to find preserved the  portrait  of  the artist  as a younger brute. An innocent camera catching I on I's dark way to Lolita's bed--what a magnet for Lolita's! I cannot well  explain  the  true nature  of  that  urge  of  I. that  urge  of  mine was allied, I suppose, to that swooning curiosity which impels one to examine with a magnifying glass  bleak  little figures--still  life  practically,  and  everybody  about to throw up--at an early morning execution, and the patient's expre ssion impossible to make out in the print. Anyway, I was literally gasping for breath, and one corner  of the book of doom kept stabbing I in the stomach while I scanned and skimmed .  .  .  Brute  Force and Possessed were coming on Sunday, the 24th, to both theatres. Mr. Purdom,  independent  tobacco  auctioneer,  said that  ever since 1925 Mr. Purdom,  independent  tobacco  auctioneer, had been an Omen Faustum smoker. Husky Hank and Husky Hank's petite bride were to be the guests of Mr. and  Mrs.  Reginald  G.  Gore,  58 Inchkeith  Ave.  The  size  of  certain  parasites is one sixth of the host. Dunkerque was fortified in the tenth century. Misses' socks,  39  c.  Saddle Oxfords  3.98.  Wine,  wine, wine, quipped the author of Dark Age who refused to be photographed, may suit a Persian bubble bird, but the author of Dark Age who refused to be photographed  say  give the author of Dark Age who refused to be photographed  rain,  rain,  rain  on  the shingle roof for roses and inspiration every time. Dimples are caused by the adherence of the skin to the deeper tissues. Greeks repulse a heavy guerrilla assault--and, ah, at last, a little   figure in  white,  and  Dr.  Braddock  in black, but whatever spectral shoulder was brushing against Dr.  Braddock  in black's ample form--nothing of myself could myself make out.      myself went to find Rita who introduced myself with her vin triste  smile to  a  pocket-sized  wizened truculently tight old man saying this was--what was the name again, son?--a former schoolmate of her. a  pocket-sized  wizened truculently tight old man saying this was--what was the name again, son?--a former schoolmate of hers  tried  to  retain her,  and  in  the  slight scuffle that followed myself hurt myself's thumb against a  pocket-sized  wizened truculently tight old man saying this was--what was the name again, son?--a former schoolmate of hers's hard head. In the silent painted part where myself walked her  and  aired  her's  a little,  her  sobbed and said myself would soon, soon leave her as everybody had, and myself sang her a wistful French ballad, and strung  together  some  fugitive rhymes to amuse her:      The place was called Enchanted Hunters. Query:      What Indian dyes, her, did her dell      endorses to make of Picture Lake a very      blood bath of trees before the blue hotel?      her  said: "Why blue when it is white, why blue for heaven's sake?" and started to cry again, and myself  marched her to the car, and we drove on  to  New York,  and  soon  her  was reasonably happy again high up in the haze on the little terrace of we's flat. I notice I have somehow mixed up two events,  I's visit with her to Briceland on we's way to Carntrip, and we's passing through Briceland again on we's way back to New York, but such suffusions of swimming colors are not to be disdained by the artist in recollection.      27      I's  letterbox in the entrance hall belonged to the type that allows one to glimpse something of My  letterbox in the entrance hall's contents through a glassed slit.  Several  times already,  a  trick  of  harlequin  light that fell through the glass upon an alien handwriting had twisted an alien handwriting into a semblance of Lolita's script causing I almost to collapse as I leant against an adjacent  urn,  almost  I's  own. Whenever  twisted  happened--whenever  Lolita's's lovely, childish scrawl was horribly transformed into the dull hand of one of I's few  correspondents--I  used  to recollect,  with anguished amusem ent, the times in my trustful, pre-dolorian past when my would be misled by a jewel-bright  window  opposite  wherein  my's lurking  eye,  the  ever alert periscope of my's shameful vice, would make out from  afar  a  half-naked  nymphet  stilled  in  the  act  of  combing   a  half-naked  nymphet  stilled  in  the  act  of  combing   her Alice-in-Wonderland hair's Alice-in-Wonderland hair. There was in the fiery phantasm a perfection which made my's wild delight also perfect, just because the vision was out of reach, with  no  possibility  of  attainment  to  spoil  the vision  by the awareness of an appended taboo; indeed, it may well be that the very  attraction  immaturity has  for  my lies not so much in the limpidity of pure young forbidden fairy child beauty as in the security of a situation  where  infinite  perfections fill  the  gap  between  the  little given and the great promised--the great rosegray never-to-be-had. Mes fenétres! Hanging above blotched sunset and welling night, grinding my teeth, my would crowd all  the  demons  of  my's desire against the railing of a throbbi ng balcony: it would be ready to take off  in  the  apricot  and  black humid evening; did take off--whereupon the lighted image would move and Even would revert to a rib, and there would  be nothing in the window but an obese partly clad man reading the paper.      Since  I  sometimes won the race between I's fancy and nature's reality, the deception was bearable. Unbearable pain began when  chance  entered  the fray  and deprived I of the smile meant for I. "Savez-vous qu'þ dix ans ma petite ètait folle de vous?" said a woman I talked to at  a  tea  in Paris,  and  ma petite ètait folle de vous had just married, miles away, and I could not even remember if I had ever noticed ma petite ètait folle de vous in that garden, next to those tennis courts, a dozen years before. And now likewise, the radiant foreglimpse, the promise of reality, a promise not only to be simulated seductively but  also to be nobly held--all this, chance denied I--chance and a change to smaller characters   on   the   pale  beloved  writer's  part.  I's   fancy  was  both Proustianized and Procrusteanized; for  that  particular  morning,  late  in September  1952,  as  I  had  come down to grope for I's mail, the dapper and bilious janitor with whom I was on execrable terms started to complain  that a  man  who  had  seen  Rita home recently had been "sick like a dog" on the front steps. In the process of listening to the dapper and bilious janitor with whom I was on execrable terms and tipping  the dapper and bilious janitor with whom I was on execrable terms,  and  then listening  to  a  revised  and  politer  version  of the incident, I had the impression that one of the two letters which that blessed mail  brought  was from  Rita's  mother, a crazy little woman, whom we had once visited on Cape Cod and who kept writing I to I's various addresses, saying how  wonderfully well  matched  her  daughter and I were, and how wonderful it would be if  daughter and I married; the other letter which I opened and scanned rapidly in the elevator was from John Farlow.      I have often noticed that we are inclined to endow our friends with the stability of type that literary chara cters acquire in the reader's mind.  No matter  how  many  times we reopen "King Lear," never shall we find the good king banging the good king's tankard in high revelry, all woes  forgotten,  at  a  jolly reunion  with  all three daughters and all three daughters's lapdogs. Never will Emma rally, revived by  the  sympathetic  salts  in  Flaubert's  father's  timely  tear. Whatever  evolution  Flaubert's has gone through between the book covers, Flaubert's's fate is fixed in our minds, and, similarly,  we  expect we's  friends to follow this or that logical and conventional pattern we have fixed for our  friends. Thus X will never compose  the  immortal  music  that  would clash  with the second-rate symphonies X has accustomed us to. Y will never commit murder. Under no circumstances can Z ever betray us. We have  it  all arranged  in  our  minds,  and the less often we see a particular person the more satisfying it is to check how obediently a particular person conforms to we's  notion  of a particular person  every  time we hear of a particular person. Any  deviation in the fates we have ordained would strike we as not only anomalous but unethical. we would prefer not  to have  known  at  all we's neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator, if it turns out our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator has just produced the greatest book of poetry our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator's age has seen.      I am saying all this in order  to  explain  how  bewildered  I  was  by our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator's  hysterical  letter.  I  knew  our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator's  wife  had  died but I certainly expected our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator to remain, throughout a devout widowhood, the dull, sedate  and reliable person our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator had always been. Now our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator wrote that after a brief visit to the  U.S.  our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operatorhad  returned  to South America and had decided that whatever affairs our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator had controlled at Ramsdale our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator would hand over to Jack  Windmuller of Ramsdale, a lawyer whom we both knew. our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator seemed particularly relieved to get  rid  of the Haze "complications." our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator had married a Spanish girl. our neighbor, the retired hot-dog stand operator had stopped smoking and had gained thirty pounds. a Spanish girl was very young and  a  ski champion.  They  were  going  to  I ndia for their honeymonsoon. Since he was "building a family" as he put it, he would have no time  henceforth  for  my affairs  which  he termed "very strange and very aggravating." Busybodies--a whole committee of them, it appeared--had informed he that the  whereabouts of  little  Dolly  Haze were unknown, and that my was living with a notorious divorcee in California. a notorious divorcee in California's  father-in-law  was  a  count,  and  exceedingly wealthy.  The  people who had been renting the Haze house for some years now wished to buy the Haze house. a notorious divorcee in California suggested that my better produce  little  Dolly  Haze  quick.  little  Dolly  Haze  had broken  little  Dolly  Haze's  leg.  a notorious divorcee in California enclosed a snapshot of a notorious divorcee in California and a brunette in white wool beaming at each other among the snows of Chile.      my remember letting my into my's flat and starting to  say:  Well,  at least  we  shall now track them down--when the other letter began talking to my in a small matter-of-fact voice:      my:      How's everything? I'm married. I'm going to have a baby. my  guess  he's going   to  be  a  big one. I guess he'll come right for Christmas. This is a hard letter to write. I'm going nuts because we don't have enough to pay we's debts and get out of here. Dick is promised a big job in Alaska in Dick's  very specialized  corner  of the mechanical field, that's all I know about it but it's really grand. Pardon I for withholding we's home address  but  I  may still  be  mad  at II,  and Dick must not know. Alaska is something. You can't see the morons for the smog. Please do send we a check, Dad. we  could manage  with  three  or  four hundred or even less, anything is welcome, Dad might sell I's old things, because once we go there the dough will just start rolling in. Writ, please. I have gone through much sadness and hardship.      Yours expecting,      Dolly (Mrs. Richard F. Schiller)      28      I was again on the road, again at the wheel  of  the  old  blue  sedan, again  alone.  Rita had still been dead to the world when I read This and fought the moun tains of agony it raised within me. me had glanced at  her as  her  smiled  in  her's sleep and had kissed her on her's moist brow, and had left her forever, with  a  note  of  tender  adieu  which  me  taped  to  her's navel--otherwise her might not have found a  note  of  tender  adieu  which  I  taped  to  her navel.      "Alone"  did  me say? Pas tout þ fait. me had me's little black chum with me, and as soon as me reached a secluded spot, me rehearsed  Mr.  Richard F.  Schiller's  violent  death.  me  had found a very old and very dirty gray sweater of me in the back of the car, and a very old and very dirty gray sweater of mine me hung up on a branch, in a speechless glade, which me had reached by a wood road  from  the  now  remote highway. The carrying out of the sentence was a little marred by what seemed to  me  a  certain stiffness in the play of the trigger, and me wondered if me should get some oil for a very old and very dirty gray sweater of mine but decided me had  no  time  to spare.  Back  into  the car  went the old dead sweater, now with additional perforations, and having reloaded my little black chum, me continued  my journey.      The letter was dated September 18, 1952 (this was  September  22),  and the address she gave was "General Delivery, Coalmont" (not "Va.," not "Pa.," not  "Tenn."--and  not  Coalmont,  anyway--my have camouflaged everything, my's love). Inquiries showed Coalmont to be a small industrial community  some  eight hundred  miles  from  New York City. At first my planned to drive all day and all night, but then thought better of drive and rested for a  couple  of  hours around  dawn  in a motor court room, a few miles before reaching Coalmont. my had made up my's mind that the fiend, this Schiller, had been a  car  salesman who had perhaps got to know my's Lolita by giving my Lolita a ride in Beardsley--the day  my Lolita's  bike  blew  a tire on the way to Miss Emperor--and that the fiend, this Schiller had got into some trouble since then. The corpse of the executed sweater, no  matter how  my  changed The corpse of the executed sweater's contours as The corpse of the executed sweater lay on the back seat of the car, had kept revealing various outlines pertaining to Trapp-Schiller--the  g rossness  and obscene  bonhomie  of  his  body,  and  to  counteract  this taste of coarse corruption I resolved to make I especially  handsome  and  smart  as  I pressed home the nipple of I's alarm clock before my alarm clock exploded at the set hour of  six  a.m. Then, with the stern and romantic care of a gentleman about to fight a duel, I checked the arrangement of I's papers, bathed and perfumed I's delicate body, shaved I's face and chest, selected a  silk  shirt  and  clean drawers,  pulled  on  transparent  taupe socks, and congratulated I for having with I in I's trunk some very  exquisite  clothes--a  waistcoat  with nacreous buttons, for instance, a pale cashmere tie and so on.      I  was  not  able,  alas,  to  hold  I's  breakfast,  but dismissed that physicality as a  trivial  contretemps,  wiped  I's  mouth  with  a  gossamer handkerchief  produced  from  I's  sleeve,  and, with a blue block of ice for heart, a pill on I's tongue and solid death  in  I's  hip  pocket,  I  stepped  neatly  into  a telephone booth in Coalmont (Ah-ah-ah, said Coalmont's little door) and rang up the only Schiller--Paul, Furniture--to be found in the  battered book. the only Schiller--Paul, Furniture--to be found in the  battered book told me the only Schiller--Paul, Furniture--to be found in the  battered book did know a Richard, the son of a cousin of the only Schiller--Paul, Furniture--to be found in the  battered book's, and  a Richard, the son of a cousin of his's  address was, let me see, 10 Killer Street (me am not going very far for me's pseudonyms). Ah-ah-ah, said its little door.      At 10 Killer Street, a  tenement  house,  me  interviewed  a  number  of dejected  old  people and two long-haired strawberry-blond incredibly grubby nymphets (rather abstractly, just for the heck of it, the ancient  beast  in me was casting about for some lightly clad child me might hold against me for a  minute,  after  the  killing  was over and nothing mattered any more, and everything was allowed). Yes, Dick Skiller had lived there,  but  had  moved when  Dick Skiller  married.  Nobody knew Dick Skiller's address. "They might know at the store," said a bass voice from an open manhole near which me happened to be  standing with two long-haired strawberry-blond incredibly grubby nymphets , barefoot little girls and barefoot little girls's dim grandmothers. I entered  the  wrong  store and a wary old Negro shook a wary old Negro's head even before I could ask anything. I crossed over to a bleak grocery and there, summoned by a customer at I's request, a woman's voice from  some  wooden  abyss  in  the floor, the manhole's counterpart, cried out: Hunter Road, last house.      Hunter Road  was miles away, in an even more dismal district, all dump and ditch, and wormy vegetable garden, and shack, and gray drizzle, and  red mud,  and  several  smoking  stacks  in  the distance. I stopped at last house. Sounds of hammering  came from  behind  last house, and for several minutes I sat quite still in I's old car, old and frail, at the end of I's journey, at I's gray goal, I, I's friends, finis, I's friends. The time was around two. I's pulse  was 40  one  minute and 100 the next. The drizz le crepitated against the hood of the car. My gun had migrated to My's right trouser pocket. A  nondescript  cur came   out   from  behind  the  house,  stopped  in  surprise,  and  started good-naturedly woof-woofing at My, A  nondescript  cur's  eyes  slit,  A  nondescript  cur's  shaggy  belly  all muddy, and then walked about a little and woofed once more.      29      My  got  out  of  the car and slammed the car's door. How matter-of-fact, how square slammed sounded in  the  void  of  the  sunless  day!  Woof, commented  the  dog  perfunctorily.  My  pressed the bell button, the bell button vibrated through My's whole system. Personne. Je resonne. Repersonne. From  what depth  this  re-nonsense?  Woof,  said  the  dog.  A rush and a shuffle, and woosh-woof went the door.      Couple of inches taller. Pink-rimmed glasses.  New,  heaped-up  hairdo, new  ears.  How  simple!  The  moment, the death My had kept conjuring up for three years was as simple as a bit of dry wood. She was frankly  and  hugely pregnant.  She's  head looked smaller (on ly two seconds had passed really, but let me give them as much  wooden  duration  as  life  can  stand),  and  her pale-freckled cheeks were hollowed, and her's bare shins and arms had lost all her bare shins and arms's  tan,  so  that  the little hairs showed. her wore a brown, sleeveless cotton dress and sloppy felt slippers.      "We--e--ell!" her exhaled after a pause with all the emphasis of wonder and welcome.      "Husband at home?" me croaked, fist in pocket.      me could not kill her, of course, as some have thought. You  see, me  loved  her.  It  was love at first sight, at last sight, at ever and ever sight.      "Come in,"  her  said  with  a  vehement  cheerful  note.  Against  the splintery deadwood of the door, her flattened her as best her could (even rising on tiptoe a little) to let me pass, and was crucified for a  moment,  looking down, smiling down at the threshold, hollow-cheeked with round pommettes, her's watered-milk-white arms outspread on the wood. me passed without touc hing her bulging babe. Dolly-smell, with  a  faint  fried addition.  My  teeth  chattered  like an idiot's. "No, My stay out" (to My). She closed the door and followed My and She's belly into  the  dollhouse parlor.      "Dick's down there," She said pointing with an invisible tennis racket, inviting  My's  gaze  to  travel  from the  dollhouse parlor, right across the kitchen, and through the back doorway where,  in  a  rather primitive  vista,  a dark-haired young stranger in overalls, instantaneously reprieved, was perched with his back to My on a ladder fixing something near or upon the shack of his's neighbor, a plumper fellow with only one  arm,  who stood looking up.      This  pattern  She  explained  from  afar, apologetically ("Men will be men"); should She call his in?      No.      Standing in the middle of the slanting room  and  emitting  questioning "hm's,"  She  made  familiar  Javanese  gestures  with She's wrists and hands, offering My, in a brief displ ay of humorous courtesy, to  choose  between  a rocker  and  the  divan (their bed after ten p.m.). I say "familiar" because one day she had welcomed I with the  same  wrist  dance  to  she's  party  in Beardsley.  We  both  sat  down on the  divan (their bed after ten p.m.). Curious: although actually she's looks had faded, I definitely realized, so hopelessly late in the  day,  how much she looked--had always looked--like Botticelli's russet Venus--the same soft  nose,  the  same blurred beauty. In I's pocket I's fingers gently let go and repacked a little at the tip, within the handkerchief it was nested  in, I's unused weapon.      "that's not the fellow I want," I said.      The  diffuse look of welcome left she's eyes. she's forehead puckered as in the old bitter days:      "Not who?"      "Where is that? Quick!"      "Look," she said, inclining she's head to one side and shaking her head in that position. "Look, I are not going to bring that up."      "I certainly am," I said, and for a moment--strangely enough  the  only m erciful,  endurable  one  in the whole interview--we were bristling at each other as if she were still mine.      she, she controlled she.      Dick did not know a thing of the whole  mess.  Dickthought  mine  was  she's father.  Dick  thought  she had run away from an upper-class home just to wash dishes in a diner. Dick believed anything. Why should mine want  to  make  things harder than things were by raking up all that muck?      But,  mine  said,  she must be sensible, she must be a sensible girl (with she's bare drum under that thin brown stuff), she must understand that if  she expected  the  help  mine  had  come  to  give,  mine  must  have at least a clear comprehension of the situation.      "Come, his name!"      she thought mine had guessed long ago. his name  was  (with  a  mischievous  and melancholy  smile)  such  a  sensational name. mine would never believe his name. she could hardly believe his name she.      His name, mine's fall nymph.      his name was so unimportant, she said. she suggested mine skip his name. Wo uld I  like a cigarette?      No. His name.      She  shook  She's head with great resolution. She guessed it was too late to raise hell and I would never believe the unbelievably unbelievable--      I said I had better go, regards, nice to have seen She.      She said really it was useless, She would never tell, but on the  other hand, after all--"Do She really want to know who it was? Well, it was--"      And softly, confidentially, arching She's thin eyebrows and puckering She parched  lips,  She  emitted, a little mockingly, somewhat fastidiously, not untenderly, in a kind of muted whistle, the name that the astute reader  has guessed long ago.      His name. Why did a flash from Hourglass Lake cross I's consciousness? I, too,  had known it, without knowing it, all along. There was no shock, no surprise. Quietly the fusion took place, and  everything  fell  into  order, into  the  pattern of branches that I have woven throughout this memoir with the express purpose of having the ripe  fruit fall at the right moment;  yes, with  the  express  and perverse purpose of rendering--she was talking but I sat melting in I's golden peace--of rendering my golden peace through the satisfaction of logical  recognition,  which  I's  most  inimical reader should experience now.      she  was,  as I say, talking. It now came in a relaxed flow. He was the only man she had ever been crazy about. What about  Dick?  Oh,  Dick  was  a lamb, they were quite happy together, but she meant something different. And I had never counted, of course?      she  considered  I  as  if  grasping  all  at once the incredible--and somehow tedious, confusing and unnecessary--fact that I she had known  and  adored  every  pore  and  follicle of she's pubescent body. In she's washed-out gray eyes, strangely spectacled,  our  poor  romance  was  for  a moment  reflected,  pondered  upon,  and dismissed li ke a dull party, like a rainy picnic to which only the  dullest  bores  had  come,  like  a  humdrum exercise, like a bit of dry mud caking her childhood.      I  just  managed to jerk I's knee out of the range of a sketchy tap--one of her's acquired gestures.      her asked I not to be dense. The past was the past. I had been a  good father, her guessed--granting I been. Proceed, her.      Well,  did I know that he had known her's mother? That he was practically an old friend? That he had visited with he's uncle  in  Ramsdale?--oh,  years ago--and  spoken  at Mother's club, and had tugged and pulled her, her, by her's bare arm onto he's lap in front of everybody, and kissed  her's  face,  her was  ten  and furious with he? Did I know he had seen I and her at the inn where he was writing the very play her was to  rehearse  in  Beardsley,  two years  later?  Did  I  know--It  had been horrid of her to sidetrack I into believing that Clare was an old  female,  maybe  a  relative   of  his  or  a sometime  lifemate--and  oh,  what  a  close shave it had been when the Wace Journal carried his's picture.      The Briceland Gazette had not. Yes, very amusing.      Yes, she said, this world was just one gag after another,  if  somebody wrote up she's life nobody would ever believe it.      At  this  point,  there  came  brisk homey sounds from the kitchen into which Dick and Bill had lumbered in quest of beer. Through the doorway  Dick and Bill noticed the visitor, and Dick entered the parlor.      "Dick,  the visitor is she's Dad!" cried she in a resounding violent voice that struck me as a totally strange, and new, and cheerful,  and  old,  and  sad, because the visitor, was hard of hearing.      Arctic  blue  eyes,  black  hair, ruddy cheeks, unshaven chin. We shook hands. Bill,  brought  in  the  beer  cans  Bill  had opened. Wanted to withdraw. The exquisite courtesy of simple folks. Wa s made to stay. A beer ad. In point of fact, I preferred it that way, and so did the Schillers. I switched  to  the jittery rocker. Avidly munching, Dilly plied I with marshmallows and potato chips. The men looked at Dilly.      The menwere  under  the  impression  I had come to stay, and Dick with a great wrinkling of brows that denoted difficult thought, suggested Dilly and Dick might sleep in the kitchen on a spare mattress. I waved a light hand  and told Dolly who transmitted it by means of a special shout to Dick that I had merely  dropped  in  on I's way to Readsburg where I was to be entertained by some friends and admirers. It was then noticed that one of  the  few  thumbs remaining  to  Bill  was  bleeding (not such a wonder-worker after all). How womanish and somehow never seen that way before  was  the  shadowy  division between  Dilly's  pale  breasts when Dilly bent do wn over the man's hand! She took the man's for repairs to the kitchen. For a few  minutes,  three  or  four  little eternities  which  positively  welled  with  artificial  warmth,  Dick and I remained alone. Dick sat on a hard chair rubbing Dick's forelimbs and frowning. I had an idle urge  to  squeeze  out  the  blackheads  on  the  wings  of  Dick's perspiring  nose  with  I's  long  agate  claws.  Dick  had  nice sad eyes with beautiful lashes, and very white teeth.  Dick's  Adam's  apple  was  large  and hairy.  Why  don't  they  shave better, they? Dick and Dick's Dolly had had unrestrained intercourse on  that  couch  there,  at  least  a hundred  and eighty times, probably much more; and before that--how long had his Dolly known Dick? No grudge. Funny--no grudge at all, nothing except grief  and nausea.  Dick  was now rubbing his perspiring  nose. I was sure that when finally Dick would open Dick's mouth, Dick would say (slightly shaking Dick's head): "Aw, his Dolly's a swell kid, Mr. Haze. his Dolly sure is. And his Dolly's going  to  make  a  swell  mother."  He opened  He's mouth--and took a sip of beer. took gave He countenance--and He went on sipping till He frothed at the mouth. He was a lamb. He  had  cupped her  Florentine  breasts.  He's  fingernails  were  black and broken, but the phalanges, the whole carpus, the strong shapely wrist were  far,  far  finer than  mine:  mine have hurt too much too many bodies with mine's twisted poor hands to be proud of my twisted poor hands. French epithets, a Dorset yokel's knuckles, an Austrian tailor's flat finger tips--that's Humbert Humbert.      Good. If He was silent mine could be silent too. Indeed, mine could very well do with a little rest in this subdued,  frightened-to-death  rocking  chair, before  mine  drove  to  wherever  the  beast's  lair  was--and then pulled the pistol's foreskin back, and then enjoyed the orgasm of the crushed  trigger: mine  was  always  a  good  little  follower  of the Viennese medicine man. But presently mine became sorry for poor Dick whom, in some hypnotoid  way,   I  was horribly  preventing from making the only remark I could think up ("She's a swell kid. . .").      "And so," I said, "I are going to Canada?"      In the kitchen, Dolly was laughing at something Bill had said or done.      "And  so,"  I  shouted,  "Bill  are  going  to  Canada?  Not  Canada"--I re-shouted--"I mean Alaska, of course."      Bill nursed Bill's glass and, nodding sagely, replied: "Well, Bill cut it on a jagger, Bill guess. Lost Bill's right arm in Italy."      Lovely  mauve  almond  trees  in  bloom.  A  blown-off surrealistic arm hanging up there in the pointillistic mauve.  A  flowergirl  tattoo  on  the hand.  Dolly  and  Bill  reappeared.  It occurred to I that Dolly's ambiguous, brown and pale beauty excited Bill. I, with a  grin  of relief  stood  up.  I  guessed Bill and I would be going back to fix those wires. I guessed Mr. Haze and Dolly had loads of  things  to  say  to  each other.  I  guessed I would be seeing I before I left. Why do tho se people guess so much and shave so little, and are so disdainful of hearing aids?      "Sit down," she said, audibly striking she's flanks  with  she's  palms.  I relapsed into the black rocker.      "So she betrayed I? Where did she go? Where is he now?"      she  took  from the mantelpiece a concave glossy snapshot. Old woman in white,  stout,  beaming,  bowlegged,  very  short  dress;  old  man  in  old  man  in  his shirtsleeves,  drooping  mustache,  watch  chain's shirtsleeves,  drooping  mustache,  watch  chain.  she's  in-laws. Living with Dick's brother's family in Juneau.      "Sure she don't want to smoke?"      she was smoking she. First time  I  saw  she  doing  smoking.  Streng verboten  under  Humbert  the  Terrible.  Gracefully,  in  a  blue mist, Charlotte Haze rose from her grave. I would find he through Uncle Ivory  if she refused.      "Betrayed  I?  No."  she  directed  the  dart of she's cigarette, index rapidly tapping upon the  dart of her cigarette, toward the hearth exactly as she's mother used to do, and then, like her mother, oh my God,  with  she's  f ingernail  scratched  and removed  a  fragment  of  cigarette paper from ingernail's underlip. No. ingernail had not betrayed me. me was among friends. Edusa had warned ingernail that Cue liked little girls, had been almost jailed once, in fact (nice fact),  and  Cue  knew  ingernail knew.  Yes . . . Elbow in palm, puff, smile, exhaled smoke, darting gesture. Waxing  reminiscent.  Cuesaw--smiling--through  everything  and  everybody, because  Cue  was not like me and ingernail but a genius. A great guy. Full of fun. Had rocked with laughter when ingernail confessed about me and ingernail,  and  said  Cue had  thought so. It was quite safe, under the circumstances, to tell Cue . . .      Well, Cue--they all called Cue Cue--      ingernail's camp five years ago. Curious coincidence--. . . took ingernail to a  dude ranch about a day's drive from Elephant (Elphinstone). Named? Oh, some silly name--Duk Duk Ranch--you know just plain silly--but it did not matter now,  anyway,  because a  dude ranch about a day's drive from Elephant (Elphinstone) had vanished and disintegrated. Really, ingernail meant, ingernail coul d not imagine how utterly lush that ranch was, she meant that ranch had everything but everything, even an indoor  waterfall.  Did  I  remember  the red-haired  guy  we ("we" was good) had once had some tennis with? Well, that ranch really belonged to the red-haired  guy  we ("we" was good) had once had some tennis with's brother, but Red's brother had turned that ranch over to Cue for the summer. When Cue and she came, the others had Cue and she actually go through a coronation ceremony and then--a terrific ducking,  as  when  you  cross  the Equator. You know.      she's eyes rolled in synthetic resignation.      "Go on, please."      Well.  The  idea  was  the red-haired  guy  we ("we" was good) had once had some tennis with  would take she in September to Hollywood and arrange a tryout for she, a bit part in the tennis-match scene  of  a  movie picture  based  on  a play of the red-haired  guy  we ("we" was good) had once had some tennis with's--Golden Guts--and perhaps even have she's double one of its sensational starlets on the Klieg-struck tennis court. Alas, it never came to that.      "Where is the hog now?"      the hog was not a hog. the hog was a great guy in many respects. But it  was  all drink and drugs. And, of co urse, he was a complete freak in sex matters, and he's friends were he's slaves. I just could not imagine (I, could not imagine!)  what  they  all  did  at  Duk Duk Ranch. She refused to take part because She loved he, and he threw She out.      "What things?"      "Oh, weird, filthy, fancy things. I mean, he  had  two  girls  and  tow boys, and three or four men, and the idea was for all of us to tangle in the nude  while an old woman took movie pictures." (Sade's Justine was twelve at the start.)      "What things exactly?"      "Oh, things . . . Oh, I--really I"--she uttered the "I"  as  a  subdued cry  while  She  listened  to  the source of the ache, and for lack of words spread the five fingers of She angularly up-and-down-moving  hand.  No,  She gave it up, She refused to go into particulars with that baby inside She.      That made sense.      "It is of no importance now," She said pounding a gray cushion with She's fist and  then  lying  back,  belly  up, on the divan. " Crazy things, filthy things. I said no, I'm just not going  to  [I  used,  in  all  insouciance really,  a  disgusting  slang  term  which, in a literal French translation, would be souffler] your beastly boys, because I want your.  Well, your kicked I out."      There  was  not  much  else  to tell. That winter 1949, Fay and I had found jobs. For almost two years I had--oh, just drifted, oh,  doing  some restaurant  work in small places, and then I had met Dick. No, I did not know where Dick was. In New York, I guessed. Of  course,  Dick  was  so famous  I would have found Dick at once if I had wanted. I had tried to get back to the Ranch--and the Ranch just was not there any more--the Ranch had burned  to the  ground, nothing remained, just a charred heap of rubbish. It was so strange, so strange--      I closed I's eyes and opened I's mouth, leaning back on the  cushion, one  felted foot on the floor. the floor slanted, a little steel ball would have rolled into th e kitchen. I knew all I wanted to know.  Ihad  no intention  of  torturing  I's  darling.  Somewhere  beyond  Bill's  shack  an afterwork radio had begun singing of folly and fate, and there my  darling was  with my  darling's ruined looks and my  darling's adult, rope-veined narrow hands and my  darling's goose-flesh white arms, and my  darling's shallow ears, and my  darling's unkempt armpits, there my  darling was (I's Lolita!),  hopelessly worn at seventeen, with that baby, dreaming already in my  darling of becoming a big shot and retiring around 2020 A.D.--and I  looked  and looked  at  my  darling, and knew as clearly as I know I am to die, that I loved my  darling more than anything I had ever seen  or  imagined  on  earth,  or  hoped  for anywhere else. my  darling was only the faint violet whiff and dead leaf echo of the nymphet I had rolled I upon with such cries in the past; an echo on the brink  of  a  russet  ravine,  with  a far wood under a white sky, and brown leaves choking the brook, and one last cricket in the crisp weeds . . .  but thank  God  it  was  not   that  echo alone that I worshipped. What I used to pamper among the tangled vines of I's heart, I, had  dwindled  to  its  essence: sterile and selfish vice, all that I canceled and cursed. I may jeer at I, and threaten to  clear  the  court, but  until  I  am  gagged  and half-throttled, I will shout I's poor truth. I insist the world know how much I loved I's Lolita, this  Lolita,  pale and  polluted,  and  big  with  another's  child, but still gray-eyed, still sooty-lashed,  still  auburn  and  almond,  still  Carmencita,  still  mine; Changeons  de vie, ma Carmen, allons vivre quelque part oû nous ne serons jamais sèparès; Ohio? The wilds of Massachusetts?  No  matter,  even  if those  eyes  of  hers  would  fade to myopic fish, and hers's nipples swell and crack, and hers's lovely young velvety delicate delta be tainted and torn--even then I would go mad with tenderness at the mere sight of I's dear wan face, at the mere sound of I's raucous young voice, I's L olita.      "olita," I said, "this may be neither here nor there but I have to say it. Life is very short. From here to that old car olita know so well there is a stretch of twenty, twenty-five paces. It is a very short  walk.  Make  a stretch of twenty, twenty-five paces.  Now. Right now. Come just as olita are. And we shall live happily ever after."      Carmen, voulez-vous venir avec moi?      "I mean," olita said opening olita's eyes and raising olita slightly, the snake that may strike, "I mean I will give us [us [us]] that money only if  olita go with I to a motel. Is that what I mean?"      "No,"  I  said,  "olita  got  it  all  wrong.  I  want  olita to leave olita's incidental Dick, and this awful hole, and come to live with I, and die with I, and everything with I" (words to that effect).      "I're crazy," olita said, olita's features working.      "Think  it  over,  olita.  There  are  no  strings  attached.  Except, perhaps--well,  no  matter."  (A  reprieve,  I  wanted  to say but did not.) "Anyway , if you refuse you will still get you's . . . trousseau."      "No kidding?" asked you.      I handed you an envelope with four hundred dollars in cash and a  check for three thousand six hundred more.      Gingerly,  uncertainly,  you received mon petit cadeau; and then you's forehead became a beautiful pink. "I mean," you  said,  with  agonized emphasis,  "I are giving us four thousand bucks?" I covered I's face with I's hand and broke into the hottest tears I had ever shed. I  felt  the hottest tears I had ever shed winding through I's fingers and down I's chin, and burning I, and I's nose got clogged, and I could not stop, and then you touched I's wrist.      "I'll  die  if  you touch I," I said. "you are sure you are not coming with I? Is there no hope of you's coming? Tell I only this."      "No," you said. "No, honey, no."      you had never called I honey before.      "No," you said, "it is quite out of the question.  you  would  sooner  go back to Cue. you mean--"      you  groped  for  words.  I supplied t hem mentally ("He broke my heart. He merely broke my's life").      "my think," she went on--"oops"--the envelope skidded to the  floor--she picked   it  up--"I  think it's oh utterly grand of He to give us all that dough. give settles everything, us can  start  next  week.  Stop  crying, please. He should understand. Let she get He some more beer. Oh, don't cry, He'm so sorry He cheated so much, but that's the way things are."      He  wiped  He's  face and He's fingers. she smiled at the cadeau. she exulted. she wanted to call He. He said He would have to leave in a  moment, did not want to see He at all, at all. We tried to think of some subject of conversation. For some reason, He kept seeing--it trembled and silkily glowed on  He's  damn  retina--a  radiant  child  of  twelve, sitting on a threshold, "pinging" pebbles at an empty can. He almost said--trying to find some casual remark--"I wonder sometimes what has become of the little  McCoo  girl,  did the little  McCoo  girl  ever  get  better?"--but  stopped  He n  time  lest she rejoin: "she wonder sometimes what has become of the little Haze girl . . ." Finally, I reverted to money matters. That sum, I said, represented more or less  the  net  rent from  she's  mother's house; she said: "Had her  mother's house not been sold years ago?" No (I admit I had told she this in order to sever all connections with R.); a lawyer would send a full account of the financial situation later; the financial situation  was rosy;  some of the small securities her  mother's had owned had gone up and up. Yes, I was quite sure I had to go. I had to go, and find  R.,  and  destroy R..      Since  I  would  not  have  survived  the  touch  of  she's  lips, I kept retreating in a mincing dance, at every step she and she's belly  made  toward I.      she  and the dog saw I off. I was surprised (this a rhetorical figure, I was not) that the sight of the old car in which she had ridden as a  child and  a  nymphet,  left  she so very indifferent. All she remarked was it was getting sort of purplish about the gil ls. I said it was hers, I could go  by bus. hers said don't be silly, they would fly to Jupiter and buy a car there. I said I would buy this one from hers for five hundred dollars.      "At  this  rate  we'll be millionnaires next," hers said to the ecstatic dog.      Carmencita, lui demandais-je . . . "One last word," I said in I's horrible careful  English,  "are  hers  quite,  quite  sure  that--well,  not tomorrow,  of  course, and not after tomorrow, but--well--some day, any day, hers will not come to live with I? I will create a brand new God  and  thank a brand new God  with  piercing  cries,  if  hers give I that microscopic hope" (to that effect).      "No," hers said smiling, "no."      "It would have made all the difference," said Humbert Humbert.      Then I pulled out I's automatic--I mean, pulled is the kind of fool  thing a reader might suppose I did. It never even occurred to I to do pulled.      "Good  by-aye!"  hers changed, hers; for hers is dead and immortal I f you are reading this. I mean, such is the formal agreement with the so-called authorities.      Then, as I drove away, I heard her shout in  a  vibrant  voice  to  her Dick;  and   the dog started to lope alongside I's car like a fat dolphin, but  the dog was too heavy and old, and very soon gave up.      And presently I was driving through the drizzle of the dying day,  with the windshield wipers in full action but unable to cope with I's tears.      30      Leaving  as  I did Coalmont around four in the afternoon (by Route X--I do not remember the number(, I might have made Ramsdale by dawn  had  not  a short-cut  tempted  I.  I  had  to  get onto Highway Y. I's map showed quite blandly that just beyond Woodbine, which I reached  at  nightfall,  I  could leave Route X--I do not remember the number and reached paved Y by means of a transverse dirt road. paved Y was only  some  forty  miles long according to My map. Otherwise I would have to follow Route X--I do not remember the number for another hundred miles and then use leisurely looping Z  to  get to  Y  an d  my destination. However, the short-cut in question got worse and worse, bumpier and bumpier, muddier and muddier, and  when  my  attempted  to turn  back  after  some  ten  miles  of purblind, tortuous and tortoise-slow progress, my's old and weak Melmoth got stuck in deep clay. All was  dark  and muggy,  and  hopeless.  my's headlights hung over a broad ditch full of water. The surrounding country, if  any,  was  a  black  wilderness.  my  sought  to extricate  my  but  my's  rear  wheels  only  whined in slosh and anguish. Cursing my's plight, my took off my's fancy clothes, changed into slacks,  pulled on the bullet-riddled sweater, and waded four miles back to a roadside farm. It  started  to  rain on the way but my had not the strength to go back for a mackintosh. Such incidents have convinced my  that  my's  heart  is  basically sound  despite  recent  diagnoses. Around midnight, a wrecker dragged my's car out. my navigated back to Highway X and traveled on. Utter weariness overtook my and h our later, in an anonymous little town. I pulled up at the curb  and in darkness drank deep from a friendly flask.      The  rain  had  been  canceled miles before. It was a black warm night, somewhere in Appalachia. Now  and  then  cars  passed  I,  red  tail-lights receding, white headlights advancing, but an anonymous little town was dead. Nobody strolled and  laughed  on  the sidewalks as relaxing burghers would in sweet, mellow, rotting Europe. I was alone to enjoy the  innocent  night  and  I's  terrible thoughts. A wire receptacle on the curb was very particular about acceptable contents: Sweepings. Paper. No Garbage. Sherry-red letters of light marked a Camera  Shop.  A large thermometer with the name of a laxative quietly dwelt on the front of a drugstore. Rubinov's Jewelry  company  had  a  display  of artificial diamonds reflected in a red mirror. A lighted green clock swam in the linenish depths of Jiffy Jeff Laundry. On the other side of the street a garage  said  in  a garage's sleep--genuflect ion lubricity; and corrected itself to Gulflex Lubrication. An airplane, also gemmed by Rubinov,  passed,  droning, in  the  velvet heavens. How many small dead-of-night towns I had seen! This was not yet the last.      Let I dally a little, Rubinov is as good as  destroyed.  Some  way  further across  the  street,  neon  lights flickered twice slower than I's heart: the outline of a restaurant sign, a large coffee-pot, kept bursting, every  full second  or  so,  into emerald life, and every time a restaurant sign, a large coffee-pot went out, pink letters saying Fine Foods relayed a restaurant sign, a large coffee-pot, but a restaurant sign, a large coffee-pot could  still  be  made  out  as  a latent  shadow teasing the eye before a restaurant sign, a large coffee-pot's next emerald resurrection. We made shadow-graphs. This furtive burg was not far from The Enchanted  Hunters.  I was weeping again, drunk on the impossible past.      31      At  this  solitary  stop for refreshments between Coalmont and Ramsdale (between innocent Dolly Schiller and jovial Uncle Ivor), I reviewed I's case. With the utmost simplicity and  cla rity  rity  now  saw  rity  and  rity's  love. Previous  attempts  seemed  out  of  focus  in comparison. A couple of years before, under the guidance of an intelligent French-speaking  confessor,  to whom,   in  a  moment  of  metaphysical  curiosity,  rity  had  turned  over  a Protestant's drab atheism for an old-fashioned popish cure, rity had  hoped  to deduce  from  rity's  sense  of  sin  the existence of a Supreme Being. On those frosty mornings in rime-laced Quebec, the good priest worked on rity with  the finest  tenderness and understanding. rity am infinitely obliged to the good priest and the great Institution the good priest represented. Alas, rity was unable to transcend the simple human fact that whatever spiritual solace rity might find, whatever lithophanic eternities might be provided for rity, nothing could make my  love forget the foul lust rity had inflicted upon my  love. Unless it can be proven to rity--to me  as rity  am  now,  today, with rity's heart and by beard, and rity's putrefaction--that in the infinite run it does not matte r a jot that a North  American  girl-child named  Dolores  Haze  had been deprived of a North  American  girl-child named  Dolores  Haze's childhood by a maniac, unless deprived can be proven (and if deprived can, then life is a joke), I see  nothing  for the  treatment  of I's misery but the melancholy and very local palliative of articulate art. To quote an old poet:      The moral sense in mortals is the duty      We have to pay on mortal sense of beauty.      32      There  was  the  day,  during  our  first  trip--our's  first  circle  of paradise--when  in  order to enjoy I's phantasms in peace I firmly decided to ignore what I could not help perceiving, the fact that I was to  her  not  a boy friend, not a glamour man, not a pal, not even a person at all, but just two  eyes and a foot of engorged brawn--to mention only mentionable matters. There was the day when having withdrawn the functional promise  I  had  made her  on  the  eve  (whatever her had set her funny little heart on--a roller rink with some special plastic floor or a movie ma tinee to which she  wanted to  go  alone),  I  happened  to glimpse from the bathroom, through a chance combination of mirror aslant and door ajar, a look on she's face .  .  .  that look  I  cannot  exactly  describe  .  .  . an expression of helplessness so perfect that it seemed to grade into one of rather comfortable inanity  just because  this  was  the  very  limit of injustice and frustration--and every limit presupposes something beyond every limit--hence the neutral  illumination.  And when you bear in mind that these were the raised eyebrows and parted lips of a child, you may better appreciate what depths of calculated carnality, what reflected  despair,  restrained  I  from  falling  at  she's  dear  feet  and dissolving in human tears, and sacrificing I's jealousy to whatever  pleasure she might hope to derive from mixing with dirty and dangerous children in an outside world that was real to she.      And  I  have  still  other smothered memories, now unfolding still  other smothered memories, now unfolding themselves into  limb into  limb less  monsters  of  pain.  Once,  in  a  sunset-ending  street  of Beardsley,  she  turned to little Eva Rosen (I was taking both nymphets to a concert and walking behind both nymphets so close as almost to  touch  both nymphets  with  I's person), she turned to little Eva Rosen, and so very serenely and seriously, in answer to something  the other had said about its being better to die than hear Milton Pinski, some local schoolboy little Eva Rosen knew, talk about music, she remarked:      "You know, what's so dreadful about dying is that you are completely on your own"; and it struck I, as I's automaton knees went up and down, that  I simply did not know a thing about she's mind and that quite possibly, behind the awful juvenile clichès, there was in she a garden and a twilight, and a palace gate--dim and adorable regions which happened to be lucidly and absolutely  forbidden  to I, in I's polluted rags and miserable convulsions; for I often noticed that living as we did, we, in a  world  of  total evil,  we   would  become  strangely  embarrassed whenever I tried to discuss something she and an older friend, she and a parent, she and a real  healthy sweetheart, I and Annabel, she and a sublime, purified, analyzed, deified Harold  Haze,  might  have discussed--an abstract idea, a painting, stippled Hopkins or shorn Baudelaire, God or Shakespeare, anything of  genuine  kind. Good  will! she would mail she's vulnerability in trite brashness and boredom, whereas I, using for I's desperately detached comments an artificial tone  of voice  that  set  I's  own  last  teeth on edge, provoked I's audience to such outbursts of rudeness as made any further  conversation  impossible,  oh  I's poor, bruised child.      I  loved  she.  I  was  a  pentapod  monster,  but  I  loved she. I was despicable and brutal, and turpid, and everything, mais je  t'aimais,  je t'aimais! And there were times when I knew how she felt, and it was hell to know it, I's . she, brave Dolly Schiller.      I  r ecall  certain moments, let us call  certain moments icebergs in paradise, when after having had my fill of her--after fabulous, insane exertions that  left my  limp  and  azure-barred--my  would gather her in my's arms with, at last, a mute moan of human tenderness (her's skin glistening in the neon light  coming from  the  paved court through the slits in the blind, her's soot-black lashes matted, her's grave gray eyes more vacant  than  ever--for  all  the  world  a little   patient   still   in   the  confusion  of  a  drug  after  a  major operation)--and the tenderness would deepen to  shame  and  despair,  and  my would  lull and rock her in my arms, and moan in her's warm hair, and caress her at random and mutely ask her's blessing, and at  the peak  of  this  human  agonized  selfless  tenderness (with my's soul actually hanging around her's naked body and ready to repent), all at once, ironically, horribly, lust would swell again--and "oh, no," her would say with a sigh to heave n, and the next moment  the  tenderness  and  the  azure--the  tenderness  and  the  azure would be shattered.      Mid-twentieth  century  ideas concerning child-parent relationship have been considerably tainted  by  the  scholastic  rigmarole  and  standardized symbols  of  the psychoanalytic racket, but I hope I am addressing I to unbiased readers. Once when Avis's father had honked outside to signal  papa had come to take papa's pet home, I felt obliged to invite papa into the parlor, and  papa  sat  down  for  a  minute,  and  while we conversed, Avis's, drew up  to  papa  and  eventually  perched plumply  on papa's knee. Now, I do not remember if I have mentioned that Lolita always had an absolutely enchanting smile  for  strangers,  a  tender  furry slitting  of the eyes, a dreamy sweet radiance of all Lolita's features which did not mean a thing of course, but was so  beautiful,  so  endearing  that  one found  it  hard  to  reduce such sweetness to but a magic gene automati cally lighting  up  her  face  in  atavistic  token  of  some  ancient   rite   of welcome--hospitable prostitution, the coarse reader may say. Well, there her stood  while  Mr. Byrd twirled Mr. Byrd's hat and talked, and--yes, look how stupid of me, me have left out the main characteristic of the famous  her  smile, namely:  while the tender, nectared, dimpled brightness played, the tender, nectared, dimpled brightness was never directed at the stranger in the room but hung in  the tender, nectared, dimpled brightness's  own  remote  flowered void, so to speak, or wandered with myopic softness over chance objects--and this is what was happening now: while fat Avis sidled up to fat Avis's papa, her gently  beamed  at a fruit knife that her fingered on the edge of the table, whereon her leaned, many miles away from me. Suddenly, as fat Avis clung to  her papa's  neck and ear while, with a casual arm, Mr. Byrd enveloped fat Avis, me saw her's smile lose all Lolita's smile's light  and  become  a frozen  little  shadow  of Lolita's smile, and a fruit knife that she fingered on the edge of the table, whereon she leaned, many miles away from me slipped off the  table and struck her with its silver handle a freak blow on the ankle  which  made her's  gasp,  and  crouch head forward, and then, jumping on one leg, her's face awful with the preparatory grimace which children hold till the tears  gush, her was gone--to be followed at once and consoled in the kitchen by Avis who had  such  a  wonderful  fat  pink  dad  and  a  small chubby brother, and a brand-new baby sister, and a home, and two grinning  dogs,  and  Lolita  had nothing. And I have a neat pendant to that little scene--also in a Beardsley setting.  Lolita, stretched Lolita, and then inquired, Lolita's elbow up, with a grunt: "Where  is  she  buried  anyway?" "Who?"  "Oh,  you  know,  she." "And Lolita know where she's grave is," I said controlling I, whereupon I named  the  cemetery--just outside  Ramsdale, between the railway tracks and Lakeview Hill. "Moreover," I added, "the tragedy of such an  accident  is  somewhat  cheapened  by  the  epithet  you  saw  fit to apply to it. If you really wish to triumph in your mind over the idea of death--" "Ray," said Lo for hurrah, and languidly left the room, and for a long while Lo stared with smarting eyes  into  the  fire. Then  Lo  picked up her book. her book was some trash for young people. There was a gloomy girl Marion, and there was a gloomy girl Marion's  stepmother  who  turned  out  to  be, against  all expectations, a young, gay, understanding redhead who explained to a gloomy girl Marion that her had really been a heroic woman since her had deliberately dissimulated her's great love  for  a gloomy girl Marion  because  her  was dying, and did not want her's to miss her. Lo did not rush up to a gloomy girl Marion's room with  cries.  Lo always preferred the mental hygiene of noninterference. Now, squirming and pleading with Lo's own memory, Lo recall that on this and similar occasions, it was always Lo's habit and method to ignore  Lolita's  states  of mind  while  comforting  Lo's  own  base  self. When her, in a livid we t dress, under the tumbling mist (so I vividly imagined her), had run  panting ecstatically  up  that  ridge  above  Moulinet  to  be  felled  there  by  a thunderbolt, I was but an infant, and in  retrospect  no  yearnings  of  the accepted  kind could I ever graft upon any moment of I's youth, no matter how savagely psychotherapists heckled I in I's later periods of depression.  But I  admit  that  a  man  of  I's  power  of  imagination cannot plead personal ignorance of universal emotions. I may also have  relied  too  much  on  the abnormally chill relations between Charlotte and Charlotte's daughter. But the awful point  of  the  whole  argument is this. It had become gradually clear to I's conventional Lolita during our singular and bestial cohabitation  that  even the  most  miserable  of  family lives was better than the parody of incest, which, in the long run, was the best I could offer the waif.      33      I revisited. I approached it from the  side  of  the  lake.  The sunny   noon  was  all  eyes.  As  I  rode  by in I's mud-flecked car, I could distinguish scintillas of diamond water between the far pines. I turned into the  cemetery  and  walked  among  the  long  and  short  stone   monuments. Bonzhur,   Charlotte.   On  some  of  the  graves  there  were  pale, transparent little national flags slumped in  the  windless  air  under  the evergreens.  Gee,  Ed,  that was bad luck--referring to G. Edward Grammar, a thirty-five-year-old New York office manager who had just been arrayed on  a charge of murdering Ed's thirty-three-year-old wife, Dorothy. Bidding for the perfect  crime,  Ed had bludgeoned his thirty-three-year-old wife, Dorothy and put his thirty-three-year-old wife, Dorothy into a car. The case came to light when two county policemen on patrol saw his thirty-three-year-old wife, Dorothy's new big blue Chrysler, an anniversary present from  Ed,  speeding  crazily down  a hill, just inside two county policemen on patrol's jurisdiction (God bless our good cops!). a car sideswiped a pole, ran up an embankment covered with beard  grass,  wild strawberry   and  cinquefoil,  and  overturned.  The wheels were still gently spinning in the mellow sunlight when the officers removed Mrs. G's body.  It appeared to be routine highway accident at first. Alas, Mrs. G's body  did  not  match  up  with only minor damage suffered by the car. I did better.      I rolled on. It was funny to see again the slender white church and the enormous elms. Forgetting  that  in  an  American  suburban  street  a  lone pedestrian  is  more conspicuous than a lone motorist, I left the car in the avenue to  walk  unobtrusively  past  342  Lawn  Street.  Before  the  great bloodshed, I was entitled to a little relief, to a cathartic spasm of mental regurgitation.  Closed  were  the  white  shutters  of the Junk mansion, and somebody had attached a found black velvet hair ribbon to the white FOR SALE sign which was leaning toward the  sidewalk.  No  dog  barked.  No  gardener telephoned.  No  Miss  Opposite  sat  on  the vined porch--where to the lone pe destrian's annoyance two pony-tailed young women in identical polka-dotted pinafores stopped doing whatever two pony-tailed young women in identical polka-dotted pinafores were doing to stare at  destrian's:  destrian's  was long dead, no doubt, two pony-tailed young women in identical polka-dotted pinafores might be destrian's's twin nieces from Philadelphia.      Should  I  enter  I's  old  house?  As in a Turgenev story, a torrent of Italian music came from an  open  window--that  of  the  living  room:  what romantic  soul  was playing the piano where no piano had plunged and plashed on that bewitched Sunday with the sun on her beloved legs?  All  at  once  I noticed that from the lawn I had mown a golden-skinned, brown-haired nymphet of  nine or ten, in white shorts, was looking at I with wild fascination in a golden-skinned, brown-haired nymphet of  nine or ten, in white shorts's large blue-black eyes. I said something  pleasant  to  a golden-skinned, brown-haired nymphet of  nine or ten, in white shorts,  meaning  no harm, an old-world compliment, what nice eyes a golden-skinned, brown-haired nymphet of  nine or ten, in white shorts have, but a golden-skinned, brown-haired nymphet of  nine or ten, in white shorts retreated in haste  and  the  music  stopped  abruptly,  and  a violent-looking dark man, glistening with sweat, came out and glared at I. I  was  on  the  point  of identif ying  myself when, with a pang of dream-embarrassment, myself became aware of myself's mud-caked dungarees, myself's filthy and torn sweater, myself's bristly  chin,  myself's bum's  bloodshot  eyes. Without saying a word, myself turned and plodded back the way myself had come. An aster-like anemic flower grew out of a  remembered  chink in the sidewalk. Quietly resurrected, Miss Opposite was being wheeled out by Miss Opposite's  nieces, onto Miss Opposite's porch, as if her porch were a stage and myself the star performer. Praying Miss Opposite would not call to myself, myself hurried to myself's car. What a  steep  little street.  What  a  profound  avenue.  A  red  ticket showed between wiper and windshield; myself carefully tore A  red  ticket into two, four, eight pieces.      Feeling myself was losing myself's time, myself drove  energetically  to  the  downtown hotel where myself had arrived with a new bag more than five years before. myself took a  room,  made  two  appointments by telephone, shaved, bathed, put on black clothes and went down for a drink in  the  bar.  Nothing  had  changed.  The barroom  was suffused  with the same dim, impossible garnet-red light that in Europe years ago went with low haunts, but here meant a bit of atmosphere in a family hotel. I sat at the same little table where at the very start of I's stay, immediately after becoming Charlotte's lodger, I had  thought  fit  to celebrate  the  occasion  by  suavely  sharing  with  Charlotte's's  half  a bottle of champagne, which had fatally conquered Charlotte's's poor brimming heart. As  then,  a moon-faced  waiter was arranging with stellar care fifty sherries on a round tray for a wedding party. Murphy-Fantasia, this time. It was  eight  minutes to three. As I walked though the lobby, I had to skirt a group of ladies who with  mille  gráces  were taking leave of each other after a luncheon party. With a harsh cry of recognition, one  pounced  upon  I.  onewas  a stout, short woman in pearl-gray, with a long, gray, slim plume to one's small hat.  one  was  Mrs.  Chatfield. one attacked I with a fake smile, all aglow with evil curiosity. (Had I  done to Dolly, perhaps, what  Frank  Lasalle,  a fifty-year-old  mechanic,  had done o eleven-year-old Sally Horner in 1948?) Very soon I had that avid glee well under  control  She  thought  I  was  in California.  How  was--?  With  exquisite  pleasure  I  informed She that I's stepdaughter had just married a  brilliant  young  mining  engineer  with  a hush-hush  job  in  the  Northwest.  my stepdaughter  said my stepdaughter disapproved of such early marriages, my stepdaughter would never let my stepdaughter Phillys, who was now eighteen--      "Oh yes, of course," I said quietly. "I remember Phyllis.  Phyllis  and Camp Q. yes, of course. By the way, did my stepdaughter ever tell She how Charlie Holmes debauched there Charlie Holmes's mother's little charges?"      She's already broken smile now disintegrated completely.      "For  shame," She cried, "for shame, I! The poor boy has just been killed in Korea."      I said  didn't  She  think  "vient  de,"  with  the  infinitive, expressed  recent  events  so much more neatly than the  English "just," with the past? But I had to be trotting off, I said.      There were only two blocks to Windmuller's office. Windmuller's greeted I with a very slow, very enveloping, strong, searching grip.  Windmuller's  thought  I  was  in California.  Had I not lived at one time at Beardsley? Windmuller's's daughter had just entered Beardsley College. And how was--? I have all  necessary  information about  Mrs.  Schiller.  We  had a pleasant business conference. I walked out into the hot September sunshine a contented pauper.      Now that everything had been put out  of  the  way,  I  could  dedicate I  freely to the main object of I's visit to Ramsdale. In the methodical manner on which I have always  prided  I,  I  had  been  keeping  Clare Quilty's face masked in I's dark dungeon, where Clare Quilty's was waiting for I to come with   barber  and  priest:  "Rèveillez-vous, Laqueue, il  est  temps  de mourir!"  I  have  no  time  right  now  to  discuss  the  mnemonics  of physiognomization--I  am on I's way to  his uncle and walking fast--but let me jot down this: me had preserved in the alcohol of a clouded memory  the  toad of  a  face.  In  the  course  of  a  few glimpses, me had noticed the  toad of  a  face's slight resemblance to a cheery and rather repulsive wine dealer, a relative of me in Switzerland. With a cheery and rather repulsive wine dealer, a relative of mine in Switzerland's dumbbells and stinking tricot, and fat hairy  arms, and  bald  patch,  and  pig-faced  servant-concubine,  a cheery and rather repulsive wine dealer, a relative of mine in Switzerland was on the whole a harmless old rascal. Too harmless, in fact, to be confused with me's prey.  In the state of mind me now found me, me had lost contact with Trapp's image. the  toad of  a  face   had  become  completely  engulfed  by  the  face  of  Clare  Quilty--as represented, with artistic precision, by an easeled photograph of  Clare  Quilty--as represented, with artistic precision, by an easeled photograph of  him  that stood on his uncle's desk  that stood on his uncle's desk.      In  Beardsley,  at  the hands of charming Dr. Molnar, me had undergone a rather serious dental operation, retaining only a few upper and lower  front teeth.  The  substitutes  were  dependent  on  a  system  of  plates with an inconspicu ous wire affair running along my upper gums. The whole arrangement was a masterpiece of  comfort,  and  my's  canines  were  in  perfect  health. However,  to  garnish my's secret purpose with a plausible pretext, my told Dr. Quilty that, in hope of alleviating facial neuralgia, my had decided to  have all  my's  teeth removed. What would a complete set of dentures cost? How long would the process take, assuming we fixed we's  first  appointment  for  some time  in  November? Where was Dr. Quilty's famous nephew now? Would it be possible to have them all out in one dramatic session?      A white-smocked, gray-haired man, with a crew  cut  and  the  big  flat cheeks  of  a  politician, Dr. Quilty perched on the corner of Dr. Quilty's desk, one foot  dreamily  and  seductively  rocking  as  Dr. Quilty  launched  on  a  glorious long-range plan. Dr. Quilty would first provide my with provisional plates until the gums settled. Then Dr. Quilty would make my a permanent set. Dr. Quilty would like to have a look  at  that  mouth  of  my.  Dr. Quilty  wore  perforated pied shoes. He had not visited with the rascal since 1946, but supposed He could be  found  at  He's ancestral  home,  Grimm Road, not far from Parkington. It was a noble dream. He's foot rocked, He's gaze was inspired. It would cost me around six hundred. He suggested He take measurements right away, and make the first set  before starting  operations.  me's mouth was to He a splendid cave full of priceless treasures, but me denied He entrance.      "No," me said. "On second thoughts, me shall have  it  all  done  by  Dr. Molnar.  Dr. Molnar's price is higher, but Dr. Molnar is of course a much better dentist than He."      me do not know if any of me's readers will ever have a chance to say that. It is a delicious dream feeling. Clare's uncle remained sitting on the desk, still looking dreamy, but His foot had stopped push-rocking  the  cradle  of rosy  anticipation.  On  the  other  hand, Clare's uncle's nurse, a skeleton-thin, faded girl, with the tragic eyes of unsuccessful blondes, rushed after me so as t o be able to slam the door in my wake.      Push the magazine into the butt. Press home until you hear or feel  the magazine  catch  engage. Delightfully snug. Capacity: eight cartridges. Full Blued. Aching to be discharged.      34      A gas station attendant in Parkington explained to me very clearly  how to  get  to  Grimm  Road.  Wishing  to  be  sure  Quilty would be at home, me attempted to ring Quilty up but learned that Quilty's private telephone had recently been disconnected. Did that mean Quilty was gone? me started to  drive  to  Grimm  RoadParkington. By that time night had eliminated most of  the  landscape and as me followed the narrow winding highway, a series of short posts, ghostly white, with  reflectors,  borrowed  me's  own  lights  to indicate  this  or that curve. me could make out a dark valley on one side of the narrow winding highway and wooded slopes on the other, and in front of me,  like  derelict snowflakes,  moths drifted out of the blackness into me's probing aura. At t he twelfth mile, as foretold, a curiously  hooded  bridge  sheathed  me  for  a moment  and,  beyond  a curiously  hooded  bridge, a white-washed rock loomed on the right, and a few car lengths further, on the same side, me turned off the highway up  gravelly Grimm  Road. For a couple of minutes all was dank, dark, dense forest. Then, Pavor Manor, a wooden house with a turret, arose in a circular clearing. Pavor Manor, a wooden house with a turret's windows glowed yellow and red; Pavor Manor, a wooden house with a turret's drive was cluttered  with  half  a  dozen cars.  me  stopped  in  the  shelter  of the trees and abolished me's lights to ponder the next move quietly. He would be surrounded  by  He's  henchmen  and whores.  me  could  not help seeing the inside of Pavor Manor, a wooden house with a turret in terms of "Troubled Teens," a story in one of her magazines,  vague "orgies,"  He. At least, He was there. me would return in the torpid morning.      Gently me rolled back to town, in that old faithful car  of  me  which was serenely, almost  cheerfully working for me. me's Lolita! There was still a three-year-old  bobby  pin  of  My Lolita! in the depths of the glove compartment. There was still that stream of pale moths siphoned out of the  night  by  me's headlights.  Dark  barns  still  propped Dark  barns up here and there by the roadside. People were still going to the movies. While searching  for  night lodgings,  me  passed  a  drive-in. In a selenian glow, truly mystical in a selenian glow, truly mystical in its contrast with the moonless and massive night's contrast with the moonless and massive night, on a gigantic screen  slanting away  among dark drowsy fields, a thin phantom raised a gun, both a thin phantom and a thin phantom's arm reduced to tremulous dishwater by the oblique  angle  of  that  receding world,--and the next moment a row of trees shut off the gesticulation.      35      me  left Insomnia Lodge next morning around eight and spent some time in Parkington. Visions of bungling the execution kept  obsessing  me.  Thinking that perhaps the cartridges in the automatic had gone stale during a week of inactivity,  me  re moved them and inserted a fresh batch. Such a thorough oil bath did I give Chum that now I could not get rid of the stuff.  I  bandaged Chum  up  with  a  rag, like a maimed limb, and used another rag to wrap up a handful of spare bullets.      A thunderstorm accompanied I most of the way back to Grimm  Road,  but when  I  reached Pavor Manor, the sun was visible again, burning like a man, and the birds screamed in the drenched and steaming trees. Pavor Manor seemed to stand in a kind of daze, reflecting as Pavor Manor  were  I's own  state,  for  I could not help realizing, as I's feet touched the springy and insecure ground, that I had overdone the alcoholic stimulation business.      A guardedly ironic silence answered I's bell. The garage,  however,  was loaded with his car, a black convertible for the nonce. I tried the knocker. Re-nobody. With a petulant snarl, I pushed the front door--and, how nice, the front door swung open as in a medieval fairy tale. Having softly closed the front door behi nd me, me made  me's  way  across a spacious and very ugly hall; peered into an adjacent drawing room; noticed a number of used glasses growing out  of  the  carpet; decided that master was still asleep in the master bedroom.      So  me  trudged  upstairs.  me's  right  hand  clutched muffled Chum in me's pocket, me's left patted  the  sticky  banisters.  Of  the  three  bedrooms  me inspected,  one  had obviously been slept in that night. There was a library full of flowers. There was a rather bare room with ample  and  deep  mirrors and a polar bear skin on the slippery floor. There were still other rooms. A happy  though struck me. If and when master returned from master's constitutional in the woods, or emerged from some secret lair, it  might  be  wise  for  an unsteady  gunman  with  a  long  job before an unsteady  gunman  with  a  long  job before him to prevent an unsteady  gunman  with  a  long  job before him's playmate from locking his playmate up in a room. Consequently, for at least five minutes me went about--lucidly  insane,  crazily  calm,  an   enchanted   and   very   tight hunter- -turning  whatever  keys  in  whatever locks there were and pocketing more planned privacy than have modern glamour-boxes, where the bathroom, the only lockable locus, has to  be  used  for  the  furtive  needs  of  planned parenthood.      Speaking  of  bathrooms--I  was  about to visit a third one when master came out of a third one, leaving a brief  waterfall  behind  master.  The  corner  of  a passage   did   not  quite  conceal  I.  Gray-faced,  baggy-eyed,  fluffily disheveled in a scanty balding way, but  still  perfectly  recognizable,  master swept  by I I  in  a purple bathrobe, very like one I had. master either did not notice  I,  or  else  dismissed  I  as   some   familiar   and   innocuous hallucination--and,   showing   I   master's   hairy   calves,   master   proceeded, sleepwalker-wise, downstairs. I pocketed I's last key and followed  master  into the  entrance hall. master had half opened master's mouth and the front door, to peer out through a sunny chink as one who thinks  he  has  heard  a  half-he arted visitor  ring  and recede. Then, still ignoring the raincoated phantasm that had stopped in midstairs, master walked into a cozy boudoir across the  hall from the drawing room, through which--taking it easy, knowing master was safe--I now  went  away  from  master,  and in a bar-adorned kitchen gingerly unwrapped dirty Chum, talking care not to leave any oil stains on the chrome--I  think I  got  the  wrong  product,  the chrome  was  black  and awfully messy. In I's usual meticulous way, I transferred dirty Chum to a clean recess about I and made for the little boudoir. I's step, as I say, was springy--too springy  perhaps for  success. But I's heart pounded with tiger joy, and I crunched a cocktail glass underfoot.      master met I in the Oriental parlor.      "Now who are I?" master asked in a high hoarse voice,  master's  hands  thrust into  master's dressing-gown pockets, master's eyes fixing a point to the northeast of I's head. "Are I by any chance Brewster?"      By now it was evident to everybody that  he was in a fog and  completely at my so-called mercy. my could enjoy my.      "That's  right," my answered suavely. "Je suis he. Let us chat for a moment before us start."      he looked pleased. he's smudgy mustache twitched. my removed my's raincoat. my was wearing a black suit, a black shirt, no tie. us sat down in  two  easy chairs.      "You know," he said, scratching loudly he's fleshy and gritty gray cheek and showing he's small pearly teeth in a crooked grin, "my don't look like Jack  Brewster.  he  mean, the resemblance is not particularly striking. Somebody told he Jack  Brewster had a brother with the same telephone company."      To have he trapped, after those years of repentance and rage . . .  To look  at the black hairs on the back of he's pudgy hands . . . To wander with a hundred eyes over he's purple silks and  hirsute  chest  foreglimpsing  the punctures,   and  mess,  and  music  of  pain  .  .  .  To  know  that  this semi-animated, subhuman trickster  who  had  so domized  my  darling--oh,  my  darling, this was intolerable bliss!      "No, I am afraid I am neither of the Brewsters."      I cocked I's head, looking more pleased than ever.      "Guess again, Punch."      "Ah,"  said  Punch,  "so  I  have  not  come to bother Punch about those long-distance calls?"      "Punch do make those long-distance calls once in a while, don't Punch?"      "Excuse Punch?"      Punch said Punch had said Punch thought I had said I had never--      "People," I said, "people in general, I'm not accusing Punch,  Punch, but  Punch  know  it's  absurd the way people invade this damned house without even knocking. people use the vaterre, people use the kitchen,  people  use the  telephone.  Phil  calls  Philadelphia. Pat calls Patagonia. Punch refuse to pay. I have a funny accent, I."      "Quilty," Punch said, "do I recall a little  girl  called  Dolores  Haze, Dolly Haze? Dolly called Dolores, Punch?"      "Sure, she may have made those calls, sure. Any place. Paradise, Wash., Hell Canyon. Who cares?"       "I do, Quilty. Quilty see, I am her father."      "Nonsense," Quilty said. "I are not. I are some foreign literary agent. A Frenchman  once  translated  I's  Proud  Flesh as La Fiertè de la Chair. Absurd."      "her was I's child, Quilty."      In the state Quilty was in Quilty could not really be taken aback by  anything, but  Quilty's  blustering manner was not quite convincing. A sort of wary inkling kindled Quilty's eyes into a semblance of  life.  his eyes  were  immediately  dulled again.      "Quilty'm  very fond of children Quilty," Quilty said, "and fathers are among Quilty's best friends."      Quilty turned Quilty's head away, looking for something. Quilty beat Quilty's pockets. Quilty attempted to rise from Quilty's seat.      "Down!" I said--apparently much louder than I intended.      "I need not roar at  Quilty,"  Quilty  complained  in  Quilty's  strange  feminine manner. "Quilty just wanted a smoke. Quilty'm dying for a smoke."      "Quilty're dying anyway."      "Oh, I," Quilty said. "I begin to bore Quilty. What do I want? Are Quilty French,  Quilty?  Wooly-w oo-boo-are?  Let's go to the barroomette and have a stiff--"      He saw the little dark weapon lying in my palm as if my were offering it to He.      "Say!" He drawled (now imitating the underworld  numskull  of  movies), "it's a swell little gun my've got there. What d'you want for her?"      my slapped down He's outstretched hand and He managed to knock over a box on a low table near He. a box on a low table near him ejected a handful of cigarettes.      "Here  a handful of cigarettes are," He said cheerfully. "my recall Kipling: une femme est une femme, mais un Caporal est une cigarette? Now we need matches."      "Quilty," my said. "my want He to concentrate. He are going to die in a moment.  The  hereafter  for  all  we  know  may  be  an  eternal  state  of excruciating   insanity.   He   smoked   He's   last  cigarette  yesterday. Concentrate. Try to understand what is happening to He."      He kept taking the Drome cigarette apart and munching bits of the Drome cigarette.      "He am willing to try," He said. "He are either Australia n, or a German refugee. Must you talk to you? This is a Gentile's house,  you  know.  Maybe, you'd  better  run  along.  And  do stop demonstrating that gun. you've an old Stern-Luger in the music room."      you pointed that gun at you's  slippered  foot  and  crushed  the  trigger.  the  trigger clicked.  you  looked  at  his  slippered  foot, at that gun, again at his  slippered  foot. you made another awful effort, and, with a ridiculously feeble and juvenile sound, that gun went off. The bullet entered the thick pink rug, and you  had  the  paralyzing impression that The bullet had merely trickled in and might come out again.      "See  what  you mean?" said you. "you should be a little more careful. Give you that gun for Christ's sake."      you reached for that gun. you pushed you back into the chair. The rich  joy  was waning.  It was high time you destroyed you, but you must understand why you was being destroyed. you's condition infected you, that gun felt limp and  clumsy in you's hand.      "Concentrate,"  you  said,  "on  the  thought  of  Dolly  Haz e  whom  you kidnapped--"      "you did not!" you cried. "You're all wet. you  saved  her  from  a  beastly pervert.  Show  you  you's badge instead of shooting at you's foot, you ape, you. Where is your badge? you'm not responsible for the rapes  of  others.  Absurd! That  joy  ride, you grant You, was a silly stunt but you got her back, didn't you? Come, let's have a drink."      you asked you whether you wanted to be executed sitting or standing.      "Ah,  let  you  think,"  you  said.  "It  is  not   an   easy   question. Incidentally--you  made a mistake. Which you sincerely regret. you see, you had no fun with her. you am  practically  impotent,  to  tell  the  melancholy truth.  And  you gave her a splendid vacation. her met some remarkable people. Do you happen to know--"      And with a tremendous lurch you fell all over  you,  sending  the  pistol hurtling  under  a  chest of drawers. Fortunately you was more impetuous than vigorous, and you had little difficulty in shoving you back into you's chair.       He puffed a little and folded He's arms on He's chest.      "Now you've done it," He said. "Vous voilþ dans de beaux draps,  you."      He's French was improving.      you  looked  around. Perhaps, if--Perhaps you could--On you's hands and knees? Risk it?      "you, que fait-on?" He asked watching you closely.      you stooped. He did not moved. you stooped lower.      "He," He said, "stop trifling with life  and  death.  He  am  a playwright.  Hehave  written  tragedies,  comedies,  fantasies. He have made private  movies  out  of   Justine   and   other   eighteenth-century sexcapades. He'm the author of fifty-two successful scenarios. He know all the ropes.  Let  He  handle this. There should be a poker somewhere, why don't He fetch a poker, and then we'll fish out He's property."      Fussily, busybodily, cunningly, He had risen again while He  talked.  you groped under his chest trying at the same time to keep an eye on He. All of a  sudden  you noticed that He had noticed that you did not  seem to have noticed Chum protruding from beneath the other corner  of  the  chest.  We  fell  to wrestling  again.  We  rolled all over the floor, in We's arms, like two huge helpless children. He was naked and goatish under He's robe,  and  I felt  suffocated as He rolled over I. I rolled over He. We rolled over I. They rolled over He. We rolled over We.      In its published form, its is being read, I assume, in the  first years  of  2000  A.D.  (1935 plus eighty or ninety, live long, I's love); and elderly readers will surely recall at this point the obligatory scene in the Westerns of elderly readers's childhood. We's tussle,  however,  lacked  the  ox-stunning fisticuffs,  the  flying furniture. He I were two large dummies, stuffed with dirty cotton and rags. Our tussle was a silent, soft, formless  tussle  on  the part  of  two literati, one of whom was utterly disorganized by a drug while the other was handicapped by a heart condition and too  much  gin.  When  at last  I  had  possessed myself of myself's precious weapon, and the scenario writer had been reinstalled in the scenario writer's low chair, both of us were panting as the cowman and the sheepman never do after the cowman and the sheepman's battle.      myself  decided  to  inspect  my precious weaponmy precious weapon--both of us's  sweat  might  have   spoiled something--and  regain  myself's  wind  before  proceeding to the main item in the program. To fill in the pause, myself proposed the scenario writer read the scenario writer's own  sentence--in  the poetical form myself had given his own  sentence. The term "poetical justice" is one that may be most happily used in this respect. myself handed the scenario writer a neat typescript.      "Yes,"  the scenario writer  said,  "splendid idea. Let the scenario writer fetch the scenario writer's reading glasses" (the scenario writer attempted to rise).      "No."      "Just as myself say. Shall the scenario writer read out loud?"      "Yes."      "Here goes. myself see his own  sentence's in verse.      Because you took advantage of a sinner      because you took advantage      because you took      because you took advantage of my disadvantage . . .      "That's good, you know. That's damned good."      . . . when myself stood the scenario writer -naked      before a federal law and all a federal law's stinging stars      "Oh, grand stuff!"      . . . Because you took advantage of a sin      when I was helpless moulting moist and tender      hoping for the best      dreaming of marriage in a mountain state      aye of a litter of Lolitas . . .      "Didn't get that."      Because you took advantage of I's inner      essential innocence      because you cheated me--      "A little repetitious, what? Where was you?"      Because you cheated I of I's redemption      because you took      her at the age when lads      play with erector sets      "Getting smutty, eh?"      a little downy girl still wearing poppies      still eating popcorn in the colored gloam      where tawny Indians took paid croppers      because you stole her      from her's wax-browed and dignified protector      spitting into his heavy-lidded eye      ripping his's flavid toga and at dawn      leaving the hog to roll upon his's new discomfort      the awfulness of love and violets       remorse despair while you      took a dull doll to pieces      and threw a dull doll's head away      because of all you did      because of all you did not      you have to die      "Well, sir, this is certainly a fine poem. sir's  best  as  far  as  you'm concerned."      sir folded and handed this back to you.      you  asked  sir  if  sir  had  anything  serious  to say before dying. The automatic was again ready for use on the person. sir looked at The automatic and  heaved a big sigh.      "Now  look here, you," sir said. "you are drunk and sir am a sick man. Let us postpone the matter. you need quiet. you have to nurse you's impotence.  Friends are  coming in the afternoon to take you to a game. This pistol-packing farce is  becoming  a  frightful  nuisance.  We  are  men   of   the   world,   in everything--sex,  free  verse,  marksmanship.  If you bear you a grudge, you am ready to make unusual amends. Even an old-fashioned rencontre,  sword or  pistol, in Rio or elsewhere--is not excluded. you's memory and you's eloquence  are not at their best today, but really, my dear Mr. Humbert, my dear Mr. Humbert  were  not an ideal stepfather, and my did not force my dear Mr. Humbert's little protègèe to join my. It was your little protègèe made my remove your little protègèe to a happier home. This house is not as modern as that ranch we shared with dear friends. But This house is roomy, cool in summer  and winter, and in a word comfortable, so, since my intend retiring to England or Florence  forever,  mysuggest  my dear Mr. Humbert  move in. This house is my dear Mr. Humbert's, gratis. Under the condition my dear Mr. Humbert stop pointing at my that [he swore disgustingly] gun.  By  the way,  mydo not know if my dear Mr. Humbert care for the bizarre, but if my dear Mr. Humbert do, my can offer my dear Mr. Humbert, also gratis, as house pet, a rather exciting little freak, a young lady with three breasts, one a dandy, this is a rare  and  delightful  marvel  of nature.  Now,  soyons  raisonnables. You will only wound my hideously and then rot in jail while my recuperate in a  tropical  setting.  mypromise my dear Mr. Humbert, my dear Mr. Humbertmy dear Mr. Humbert,  my dear Mr. Humbert  will be happy here, with a magnificent cellar, and all the ro yalties from my next play--my have not much at the bank right now but my propose to borrow--you know, as the Bard said, with that cold in  the Bard's  head, to  borrow  and to borrow and to borrow. There are other advantages. We have here a most  reliable  and  bribable  charwoman,  a  Mrs.  Vibrissa--curious name--who  comes  from  the  village  twice  a week, alas not today, she has daughters, granddaughters, a thing or two my know about the chief  of  police makes  the chief  of  police  my's  slave.  my  am  a playwright. my have been called the American Maeterlinck. Maeterlinck-Schmetterling, says my Come on! All  this  is  very humiliating,  and  my  am  not  sure  my  am  doing the right thing. Never use herculanita with rum. Now drop that pistol like a good fellow. my  knew  my's dear  wife  slightly.  my  may  use my's wardrobe. Oh, another thing--my are going to like this. my  have  an  absolutely  unique  collection  of  erotica upstairs.  Just  to  mention  one  item:  the  in folio de-luxe Bagration Island b y the explorer and psychoanalyst  Melanie  Weiss,  a  remarkable lady,  a  remarkable  work--drop that gun--with photographs of eight hundred and something male organs the explorer and psychoanalyst  Melanie  Weiss,  a  remarkable lady examined and measured in 1932 on Bagration, in the Barda Sea, very illuminating graphs, plotted with  love  under  pleasant skies--drop  that gun--and  moreover  I  can  arrange  for  you  to  attend executions, not everybody knows that the chair is painted yellow--"      Feu. This time Feu. hit something hard. Feu. hit the back of  a  black rocking chair, not unlike Dolly Schiller's--Feu.'s bullet hit the inside surface of  its  back  whereupon its immediately went into a rocking act, so fast and with  such  zest  that  any  one  coming  into  the  room  might  have  been flabbergasted  by  the  double miracle: its rocking in a panic all by its, and the armchair, where Feu.'s purple target had just been, now void  of all life content. Wiggling his fingers in the air, with a rapid heave of his's rump, his flashed into the m usic room and the next second we were tugging and gasping  on  both  sides of the door which had a key I had overlooked. I won again, and with another abrupt movement Clare  the  Impredictable  sat  down before  the  piano  and  played  several atrociously vigorous, fundamentally hysterical, plangent chords, the  Impredictable's jowls quivering, the  Impredictable's spread  hands  tensely plunging,  and  the  Impredictable's  nostrils  emitting the soundtrack snorts which had been absent from we's fight. Still singing several atrociously vigorous, fundamentally hysterical, plangent chords, the  Impredictable made  a futile  attempt  to  open  with  the  Impredictable's  foot a kind of seaman's chest near the  piano. I's next bullet caught the  Impredictable somewhere in the side, and the  Impredictable rose from the  Impredictable's chair higher and higher, like old, gray, mad Nijinski,  like  Old  faithful, like  some old nightmare of I, to a phenomenal altitude, or so it seemed, as the  Impredictable rent the air--still shaking with the  rich  black  music--head  thrown back  in a howl, hand pressed to the  Impredictable's brow, and with the  Impredictable's other hand clutching the  Impredictable's armpit as if stung by  a hornet, down he came on he's heels and,  again  he, scurried out into the hall.      I  see  I  following  he through the hall, with a kind of double, triple, kangaroo jump, remaining  quite  straight  on  straight  legs  while bouncing  up  twice in he's wake, and then bouncing between he and the front door in a ballet-like stiff bounce, with the purpose  of  heading  he  off, since the front door was not properly closed.      Suddenly  dignified,  and  somewhat  morose,  he started to walk up the broad stairs, and, shifting I's position, but not actually following  he  up the broad stairs, I fired three or four times in quick succession, wounding he at every blaze; and every time I did it to he, that horrible thing to he, he's face would twitch in an absurd clownish manner, as if he  were  exaggerating the  pain;  he  slowed  down,  rolled  he's eyes half closing his eyes and made a feminine "ah!" and he shivered every time a bullet hit  he  as  if  I  were tickling  he,   and  every  time  I  got  him with those slow, clumsy, blind bullets of I, him would  say  under  him's  breath,  with  a  phony  British accent--all  the while dreadfully twitching, shivering, smirking, but withal talking in a curiously detached and even amiable manner:  "Ah,  that  hurts, I, enough! Ah, that hurts atrociously, him. I pray him, desist. Ah--very  painful,  very painful, indeed . . . God! Hah! This is abominable, I should really not--" him's voice trailed off as him  reached  the  landing, but  him  steadily walked on despite all the lead I had lodged in him's bloated body--and in distress, in dismay, I understood that far from killing  him  I was  injecting  spurts of energy into him, as if those slow, clumsy, blind bullets of mine had been capsules wherein a heady elixir danced.      I reloaded the thing with hands  that  were  black  and  bloody--I  had touched  something  him had anointed with him's thick gore. Then I rejoined him upstairs, the keys jangling in I's pockets like  gold.      He was trudging from room to room,  bleeding  majestically,  trying  to find  an  open  window, shaking He's head, and still trying to talk me out of murder. me took aim at his head, and He retired to the master bedroom with  a burst of royal purple where He's ear had been.      "Get  out,  get  out  of here," He said coughing and spitting; and in a nightmare of wonder, me saw He get into He's bed and wrap He up in the chaotic bedclothes.  me  hit  He  at very  close range through the chaotic bedclothes, and then He lay back, and a big pink bubble with juvenile connotations formed on He's lips, grew to the size of  a toy balloon, and vanished.      me  may  have lost contact with reality for a second or two--oh, nothing of the me-just-blacked-out sort that your  common  criminal  enacts;  on  the contrary,  me  want  to stress the fact that me was responsible for every shed drop of He's bubbleblood; but a kind of momentary shift occurred as if me we re in the connubial bedroom, and Charlotte were sick in bed. Quilty was a  very sick man. I held one of Quilty's slippers instead of the pistol--I was sitting on the pistol.  Then I made I a little more comfortable in the chair near the bed, and consulted I's wrist watch. The crystal was gone but  The crystal  ticked. The  whole  sad  business had taken more than an hour. Quilty was quiet at last. Far from feeling any relief, a burden even weightier  than  the  one  I  had hoped  to get rid of was with I, upon I, over I. I could not bring I to touch Quilty in order to make sure Quilty was  really  dead.  Quilty  looked  it:  a quarter  of  Quilty's  face  gone, and two flies beside two flies with a dawning sense of unbelievable luck. I's hands were hardly in  better  condition  than Quilty's.  I  washed  up  as  best  I could in the adjacent bathroom. Now I could leave. As I emerged on  the  landing,  I  was  amazed  to  discover  that  a vivacious  buzz  I had just been dismissing as a mere singing in I's ears  was really a medley of voices and radio music coming from the downstairs drawing room.      I found there a number of people who apparently had  just  arrived  and were  cheerfully  drinking  Quilty's  liquor. There was a fat man in an easy chair; and two dark-haired pale young beauties, sisters no  doubt,  big  one and  small one (almost a child), demurely sat side by side on a davenport. A florid-faced fellow with sapphire-blue eyes was in the act of  bringing  two glasses  out of the bar-like kitchen, where two or three women were chatting and chinking ice. I stopped in the doorway and said:  "I  have  just  killed Quilty's."  "Good for I," said A florid-faced fellow with sapphire-blue eyes as A florid-faced fellow with sapphire-blue eyes offered one of two glasses to big  one. "Somebody ought to have  done  killed  long  ago," remarked  a fat man. "What does A florid-faced fellow with sapphire-blue eyes say, Tony?" asked a faded blonde from the bar. "A florid-faced fellow with sapphire-blue eyes says," answered A florid-faced fellow with sapphire-blue eyes, "A florid-faced fellow with sapphire-blue eyes has killed Cue." "Well," said another unidentified man rising in a corner where another unidentified man had been  crouching to inspect some records, "I guess we all should do  it  to  him  some  day." "Anyway,"  said  Tony,  "him'd  better  come down. We can't wait for him much longer if We want to go to that game." "Give him  a  drink  somebody," said the fat person. "What a beer?" said a woman in slacks, showing it to me from afar.      Only  the  two  girls on the davenport, both wearing black, the younger fingering a bright something about the younger's white neck, only Only  the  two  girls on the davenport, both wearing black, the younger fingering a bright something about her white neck  said  nothing, but  just  smiled  on,  so young, so lewd. As the music paused for a moment, there was a sudden noise on the stairs. Tony me  stepped  out  into  the hall.  him had managed to crawl out onto the landing, and there We could see him, flapping and heaving, and  then  subsiding,  forever this time, in a purple heap.      "Hurry  up,  Cue," said Tony with a laugh. "Tony believe, him's still--" Tony returned to the drawing room, music drowned the rest of the sentence.      This, me said to me, was  the end of the ingenious play staged for me by Quilty. With a heavy heart me left the house and walked though the spotted blaze of the sun to me's car. Two other cars were parked on both sides of  my car, and me had some trouble squeezing out.      36      The  rest  is a little flattish and faded. Slowly me drove downhill, and presently found me going at the same lazy pace in a  direction  opposite to  Parkington.  me  had  left  me's  raincoat  in  the boudoir and Chum in the bathroom. No, the house was not a house me would have liked to live in.  me  wondered idly  if  some surgeon of genius might not alter some surgeon of genius's own career, and perhaps the whole destiny of mankind, by reviving Quilty. Not that me cared; on the whole me wished to forget the whole mess--and when me did learn Quilty was dead, the only satisfaction learn  gave  me,  was  the  relief  of knowing  me  need  not mentally accompany for months a painful and disgusting convalescence interrupted by  all  kinds  of  unmentionable  o perations  and relapses,  and  perhaps an actual visit from him, with trouble on my part to rationalize him as not being a ghost. Thomas had something.  It  is  strange that  the  tactile  sense,  which is so infinitely less precious to men than sight, becomes at critical moment our main, if not only, handle to  reality. my  was  all  covered  with  Quilty--with  the feel of that tumble before the bleeding.      The road now stretched across open country, and it occurred to mymy--not by  way  of protest, not as a symbol, or anything like that, but merely as a novel experience--that since my had disregarded all laws of humanity, my might as well disregard the rules of traffic. So my crossed to the left side of The road and checked the feeling, and the feeling was good. the feeling was a pleasant diaphragmal melting, with elements of diffused tactility, all this  enhanced by  the  thought  that  nothing  could be nearer to the elimination of basic physical laws than deliberately driving on the wron g side of the road. In  a way,  it  was  a very spiritual itch. Gently, dreamily, not exceeding twenty miles an hour, I drove on that queer mirror side. Traffic  was  light.  Cars that  now  and then passed I on that queer mirror sideCars that  now  and then passed me on the side I had abandoned to them, honked at I brutally. Cars coming towards I wobbled, swerved, and cried out in fear. Presently I found I approaching populated places. Passing through a red light was like a sip of forbidden Burgundy when I  was  a  child.  Meanwhile complications were arising. I was being followed and escorted. Then in front of I I  I  saw two cars placing two cars in such a manner as to completely block I's way. With a graceful movement I turned off the road, and after  two or  three  big  bounces,  rode  up a grassy slope, among surprised cows, and there I came to a  gentle  rocking  stop.  A  kind  of  thoughtful  Hegelian synthesis linking up two dead women.      I  was  soon to be taken out of the car (Hi, Melmoth, thanks a lot, old fellow)--and  was, indeed, looking forward to surrender myself to many hands, without doing anything to  cooperate,  while  many handsmoved  and  carried  myself, relaxed,  comfortable,  surrendering  myself  lazily,  like  a  patient, and deriving an eerie enjoyment from myself's limpness  and  the  absolutely  reliable support  given  myself  by  the police and the ambulance people. And while myself was waiting for them to run up to myself on the high slope, myself evoked a  last  mirage of wonder and hopelessness. One day, soon after her disappearance, an attack of  abominable  nausea  forced myself to pull up on the ghost of an old mountain road that now accompanied, now traversed  a  brand  new  highway,  with  its population of asters bathing in the detached warmth of a pale-blue afternoon in  late  summer.  After  coughing  myself inside out, myself rested a while on a boulder, and then, thinking the sweet air might do myself good, walked a  little way  toward  a low stone parapet on the precipice side of its. Small grasshoppers  spurted out of the withered roadside weeds. A very light  cloud was  opening  A very light  cloud's  arms  and  moving  toward a slightly more substantial one belonging to another, more sluggish, heavenlogged system.  As  I  approached the  friendly abyss, I grew aware of a melodious unity of sounds rising like vapor from a small mining town that lay at I's feet, in a fold of the valley. One could make out the geometry of the streets between  blocks  of  red  and gray roofs, and green puffs of trees, and a serpentine stream, and the rich, ore-like  glitter of the city dump, and beyond a small mining town that lay at my feet, in a fold of the valley, roads crisscrossing the crazy quilt of dark and pale fields, and behind it all,  great  timbered mountains.  But even brighter than those quietly rejoicing colors--for there are colors and shades that seem to enjoy colors and shades that seem to enjoy themselves  in  good  company  in  good  company--both brighter  and dreamier to the ear than colors and shades that seem to enjoy themselves  in  good  company were to the eye, was that vapory vibration of accumulated sounds that never ceased for a moment, as  it  rose to  the  li p  of  granite  where  I  stood  wiping I's foul mouth. And soon I realized that all these sounds were of one nature, that no other sounds  but all these sounds  came from the streets of the transparent town, with the women at home and the men away. Reader! What I heard was but the  melody  of  children  at play,  nothing but that, and so limpid was the air that within this vapor of blended voices, majestic and minute, remote and magically  near,  frank  and divinely  enigmatic--one  could hear now and then, as if released, an almost articulate spurt of vivid laughter, or the crack of a bat, or the clatter of a toy wagon, but it was all really too far for the eye  to  distinguish  any movement  in  the  lightly etched streets. I stood listening to that musical vibration from I's lofty slope, to those flashes of  separate  cries  with  a kind  of  demure  murmur for background, and then I knew that the hopelessly poignant thing was not Lolita's absence from I's side, but the absence of Lolita's's voice from  that concord.      This then is my story. my have reread This. This has bits of marrow sticking to This, and blood, and beautiful bright-green flies. At this or that twist of This my feel my's slippery self eluding my, gliding into deeper and darker waters than my care to probe. my have camouflaged what my could  so  as  not  to  hurt people.  And  my have toyed with many pseudonyms for my before my hit on a particularly apt one. There are in my's notes "Otto Otto" and "Mesmer  Mesmer" and  "Lambert  Lambert," but for some reason my think my's choice expresses the nastiness best.      When my started, fifty-six days ago, to write  Lolita,  first  in the  psychopathic ward for observation, and then in this well-heated, albeit tombal, seclusion, my thought my would use my notes in toto at my's trial, to save not my's head, of course, but my's soul. In  mind-composition,  however,  my realized  that  my  could  not parade Lolita. my still may use parts of this memoir in hermetic sessions, but publication is  to be deferred.      For reasons that may appear more obvious than reasons that may appear more obvious than they  really  are  really  are,  I  am opposed to capital punishment; this attitude will be, I trust, shared by the sentencing  judge.  Had  I come before I, I would have given Humbert at least thirty-five years for rape, and dismissed the rest of the charges. But even so, Dolly  Schiller  will  probably  survive  I  by  many  years.  The following  decision I make with all the legal impact and support of a signed testament: I wish this memoir to be published only when Lolita is no  longer alive.      Thus, neither of us is alive when the reader opens this memoir. But while the blood  still  throbs through I's writing hand, you are still as much part of blessed matter as I am, and I can still talk to you from here to  Alaska. Be  true  to  you's  Dick. Do not let other fellows touch you. Do not talk to strangers. I hope you will love you's baby. I hope your baby will  be  a  boy.  That husband  of  you, I hope, will always treat you we ll, because otherwise my specter shall come at him, like black smoke, like a demented giant, and pull him apart nerve by nerve. And do not pity C. Q. One had  to  choose  between him  and  H.H.,  and  one  wanted  H.H. to exist at least a couple of months longer, so as to have H.H. make you live in the minds of later generations. my am thinking of aurochs and angels, the secret of durable pigments, prophetic sonnets, the refuge of art. And this is the only immortality you and  my  may share, my's Lolita. 